Ray Peat's Newsletter
"The cure of humøn cancer wìll be the resultunt of biochemßtry of cøncer and of biochemistry of møn." Otto llarburg
Copyright 2016 Raymond Peat P.O. Box 5764 Eugene OR 97405
Not for republication without written permission.July 2016
100 Years of Cancer Metabolism
Since around 1950, the culture of biology and
medicine in the U.S. has been re-engineered in
ways that make it incompatible with older ideas
on the same subjects, the way new computers are
designed so that they can't use old programs.
Many people are now writing about "cancer
metabolism," especially Otto Warburg's 1923
discovery of cancer's "aerobic glycolysis," but
most of them are taking his ideas out of context,
to make them fit into the idea that the prime cause
of cancer is a genetic defect, whose metabolic
consequences might make it possible to kill the
mutated cells without harming the rest of the
organism.
When Warburg observed the production of
large amounts of lactic acid by cancer cells in the
presence of oxygen, and described it as "impaired
respiration," with an absence of the "Pasteur
effect," he \Mas placing the cancer problem
exactly at the center of the question of the nature
of life. One of the implications of his idea was
that cancer was a basic adaptive survival process
of cells, exactly the sort of thing that would
suggest that a 'oprecisely targeted poison" would
fail.
In Greece more than 2000 years ago, there was
already a general understanding of metabolism, in
which breathing was seen to be required for
maintaining consciousness, vital heat production,
assimilation of foods, and organization of
functions. The details of oxidative metabolism
were mostly unknown until the second quarter of
the 20th century, and are still being worked out.
In Louis Pasteur's time, the leading chemists
believed that fermentation, the production of
alcohol from sugar, was produced by lifelesscatalysts, activated by oxygen. Pasteur, without
knowing any of the details of cell physiology, was
able to show that fermentation was an internal
process of living organisms, and that they did this
in the absence of oxygen. In the presence of
oxygen and sugar, the yeast grew without produc-
itrg alcohol-respiration inhibits fermentation.
(The Pasteur Effect that Warburg referred to is
the suppression of lactic acid production from
glucose in the presence of oxygen.)
Pasteur's work was good physiological
chemistry, but the mechanists called it "vitalism,"
and thought it was unscientific. For the next fifty
years, a lot of effort was invested in the elimina-
tion of "vitalism" from biology, and some impor-
tant discoveries (such as MacMunn's respiratory
pigments in the 1880s) were neglected because
they didn't fit into mainsheam biology. In the
1920s, David Keilin in England rediscovered the
respiratory pigments, and tried to explain their
function by suggesting that there were particles in
cells that acted as general oxidative catalysts, the
way a platinum surface might.
One of the most interesting discoveries of
Keilin's was that in living tissue the respiratory
pigments are in a dynamic equilibrium between
oxidation and reduction. Intense stimulation, by2
consuming the oxygen locally, would cause them
to become fully reduced, as electrons
accumulated, and when resting tissue was
supplied with an excess of oxygen, the pigments
faded, with their nearly complete oxidation.
Cyanide and carbon monoxide, by shifting the
balance toward an excess of electrons, produced
the same color change as intense stimulation and
muscle contraction.
Warburg, around the same time, suggested
that his "respiratory enzyme" might be acting on
particles that served as catalysts, the way charcoal
might. This was the work for which he received
the 1931 Nobel Prize, not the insightful, but holis-
tic, study of cancer metabolism. It wasn't until the
late 1930s that the important idea of a respiratory
chain was integrated with the recent recognition
of ATP as an "energy transfer molecule" and the
elaboration of the citric acid ("Krebs") cycle
which provides fuel for oxidative energy produc-
tion. Essential parts of the respiratory chain
weren't discovered until the 1950s.
A little before Warburg's study of cancer
metabolism, W.F. Koch, a professor of physio-
logical chemistry in Detroit, had expressed his
opinion that cancer, allergy, and susceptibilþ to
infections resulted from defective tissue
oxidation. Some of his articles were published in
international journals, but newspaper articles
describing cancer cures made Koch famous
throughout Europe and America.
Koch had been a student of Moses Gomberg,
who in 1900 had produced the first stable free
radical (the triphenylrnetþl radical). During the
years of Koch's study at the University of Michi-
gan (1905 to l9l4), chemists and physicists were
exploring the properties of carbonyl (C:O) groups
and their interactions, trying to explain the
unusual reactivities and colors of molecules
containing these groups. While he was at the
university, Koch lived with the family of a profes-
sor of homeopatþ. From Koch's language, it's
clear that he had assimilated the best contempo-
rary knowledge of physical chemistry, and his
holistic approach-treating the patient rather than
the disease-reflected his familiarity with homeo-
pathic medicine.V/hen Koch began applying his ideas to the
treatment of cancer patients, in 1916, the
existence of Gomberg's free radical was still
questioned by the majority of chemists; it was
only in the early 1930s, when free radical chemis-
try began to have industrial uses, that the possibil-
ity of stable free radicals came to be widely
recognized by academic chemists. When Koch
used the idea of electronic resonance within
molecules, and between molecules, and in cells
and organisms, to describe his therapeutic
method, most physicians had no idea of what he
was talking about. To some, the idea of catalyzing
free radical oxidations in a patient sounded crazy
and dangerous. The FDA invested considerable
time and expense in demonizing Koch and his
dangerous oxidative theory of treatment. I think
Otto Warburg and Albert Szent-Gyorgyi were
among the few who thought that Koch might be
talking about something real. Szent-Gyorgyi
acknowledged having "the highest respect" for
Koch's work, but he was clearly aware of the
dangers involved in premature holism.
In the 1950s and 1960s, Szent-Gyorgyi began
talking openly about life processes in terms of a
very precise balance between oxidation and
reduction which kept systems of electrons in cells
in a special free-radical-like state, oscillating
between "donor" and "acceptor" molecules. He
believed that a deficiency of the naturally occur-
ring oxidative dicarbonyl molecule metþlglyoxal
might be a cause of cancer.
There is still interest in his theory, for
example "The anti-cancer effect of metþlglyoxal
is now well established in the literature" (Pal, et
al., 2016), but that molecule can also be toxic,
depending on the condition of the cell. When the
cell is healtþ, metþlglyoxal will be just one of
many factors being created in the right place at
the right time. The more volatile molecule
glyoxal was one of Koch's reagents.
Early in his research Szent-Gyorgyi believed
that vitamin C was one of the catalysts supporting
oxidative metabolism in animals. The ordinary
ascorbic acid (which contains one carbonyl group,
activated by its conjugation with double bonded
carbons) is, in the cell, oxidized to dehydroascor-
bate, a tricarbonyl, with a relatively stable freeJ
radical intermediate state, semidehydroascorbate.
The oxidized form greatly predominates in
healthy cells, but in cancer cells the reduced form
is increased. This corresponds to the generally
less oxidized state of cancer cells, or of normal
cells that are in an excessively excited state,
relative to the availability of oxygen.
In his 1937 Nobel lecture, Szent-Gyorgyi
began by saying "A living cell requires energy not
only for all its functions, but also for the mainte-
nance of its structure. Without energy life would
be extinguished instantaneously, and the cellular
fabric would collapse." Many yeals later he
explained that he saw cell structure as an integral
conductive/semiconductive system, and cellular
movement and other functions, as consequences
of the flow of energy through that system.
In the 1940s he was exploring the role of ATP
in muscle contraction, and observed that muscle
can contract without splitting ATP
(Szent-Gyorgyi, 1949). Gilbert Ling's work
shows that it's the electron-withdrawing effect of
ATP that explains its effects, rather than its inter-
nal bond energy. In physics, the idea of coopera-
tive phase transition is familiarly used to explain
water's change of state during freezing and
melting, but the reductionist ideology that is so
conspicuous in science makes biologists reluctant
to see it in the changes of state that occur in living
cells. The idea that the bond energy of ATP is
used to power muscle contraction, by causing
little levers to move, is intimately associated with
the belief in membranes, pumps, and random
diffusion of en4rmes and their substrates. To the
mechanist, cells, organisms, and consciousness
are just statistical abstracts of molecular events,
and cancer is neatly explained as the product of
random genetic mutations.
The way energy flows through a system
depends on the conductive and catalytic condition
of the system, and the condition of the system
depends on the flow of energy. When a cell is
stressed, stimulated beyond its ability to respond
with increased respiration to produce the energy
needed to return to its resting state, the stress
itself is a relatively reducing state, like the
cytochrome color shift Keilin saw when muscles
contracted or were poisoned.The reduced state leads to increased produc-
tion of lactate, which produces enough energy to
keep the cell alive, but the lactate contributes to
the stressed redox shift in the cell that produces it,
as well as in the surrounding cells.
The new reductionist interpretation of
Warburg's idea is that the shift to aerobic glycoly-
sis and lactate production is the result of a genetic
change that centers on increasing glucose use, but
in reality glucose deprivation is one of the things
that can lead to the shift to aerobic glycolysis,
with the lactate then being derived from the
breakdown of tissue protein instead of glucose.
V.S. Shapot found that providing both glucose
and oxygen to rats with Ehrlich ascites cancer
could produce the Pasteur effect, inhibiting glyco-
lysis and restoring cellular respiration (Tagi-zade
and Shapot, l97l). The ability of glucose to
reduce excitation in other situations probably
involves the increased oxidative state; an impor-
tant part of the cancer physiology is over-
excitation of the brain, especially the hypothala-
mus, and just increasing the level of blood
glucose can lower that excitation (Shapot, et al.,
1e83).
When cells are dangerously overstimulated,
oxygen and glucose are depleted. In the absence
of oxygen, or when the ability to use oxygen is
blocked, glucose is converted to lactate, and when
glucose is depleted, glutamine is converted to
lactate. With a limited supply of oxygen but an
unlimited supply of lactate, the cell's metabolic
reactions are shifted toward a reduced, electron-
rich, state. This state inhibits the oxidation of
glucose by blocking the enzyme pyruvate
dehydrogenase, supporting the formation of
lactate. These are internal processes of stressed
cells, that can be intemrpted when the organism
provides corrective factors to restore oxidation.
When the organism as a whole is over-
burdened, with stress physiology passing into the
"learned helplessness" or shock states, its metabo-
lism shifts in the direction of reductive, "pseudo-
hypoxic" metabolism, in which the nervous
system suppresses oxidative metabolism, and the
blood serum's components reflect the reduced
state of the cytoplasm, with shifts in
lactatelpyruvate, the ketone body ratio, increased4
free fatty acids, and changes in hormones and
other regulators.
White blood cells and stem cells move from
the blood stream into the tissues that are produc-
ing lactate, and the lactate prevents them from
leaving, blocks the normal cytotoxic and phago-
cytic functions, and causes them to secrete
inflammation-promoting substances, aggravating
the local stress and inflammation. Histamine,
nitric oxide, and prostaglandins contribute to the
movement of cells into inflamed tissue.
In the first reactions to injury, the inflamma-
tory changes activate elrzJmes that support undif-
ferentiated growth. The active tþroid hormone,
T3, is destroyed locally by a speciflrc deiodinase,
prostaglandins are produced by cyclooxygenase,
estrogen by aromatase, and nitric oxide by its
synthase. These enzymes are activated by chemi-
cal reduction of their disulfide groups, converting
them to thiols, and can be inhibited by appropriate
oxidants. In a healtþ organism, those oxidants
are available.
In a healthy cancer-resistant organism, the
new cells function as phagocytes and stem cells,
supporting repair and regeneration, and the
normally reconstructed tissue begins to respond to
signals that guide its integration into the
organism. These signals include hormones, nutri-
ents, nerve activity, and even nucleic acids circu-
lating in microvesicles or exosomes.
During aging, the proportion of unsaturated fat
in the body increases, and during stress and
inflammation when free fatty acids are released
into the blood stream they interfere with oxidative
metabolism, while amplifying the inflammatory-
carcinogenic processes, providing arachidonic
acid, which activates nitric oxide synthesis
(Priante, et al., 2005) and is the precursor for
prostaglandin synthesis and activator of excitatory
processes including protein kinase C (PKC),
which is another redox-sensitive regulatory
protein. (Chu, et al., 2004).
Weight loss is often the first symptom that a
person notices before a cancer is diagnosed. In
cancer, as in sepsis, trauma, and aging, there is a
shift toward the oxidation of fat rather than
glucose. The flooding of the body with free fatty
acids shifts the whole body more strongly towardthe pseudohypoxic state of reductive stress, and
produces resistance to thyroid, insulin, and
cortisol.
In starvation, hypoglycemia leads to increased
growth hormone secretion (Goldstein, et al, 2011)
and an adaptively decreased rate of metabolism,
but in the metabolism of a cancer patient, the
growth hormone-induced shift to fat oxidation
and hypoglycemia fails to decrease energy expen-
diture. Inflammatory signals contribute to the
growth hormone increase, interfering with insulin
and the efficient use of glucose. Cellular starva-
tion, beginning with the tumor focus of metabolic
inefficiency, increases inflammation, shifting the
fuel metabolism, creating pseudohypoxia, in a
vicious progression.
The cell-quieting effect of sugar oxidation
probably involves the greater production of
carbon dioxide with a shift of the electronic
balance toward a more oxidized and coherent
state. Aging itself involves a metabolic shift in the
direction of cancer metabolism, with a relative
inability to reduce energy expenditure in the
basal, fasting state, and with increased fat oxida-
tion, decreased glucose oxidation (Al-Jaouni, et
al., 2002). The nature of sleep changes with
aging, with a decrease of the restorative deep
"slow wave" sleep in old age; this is probably an
example of the progressive inability to fully
restore the high energy resting state of cells.
With stress and aging, the body's equilibrium
on average is less oxidized, and this affects the
so-called antioxidants in food. Phenolic groups
typically have estrogenic and antioxidant effects.
Several of the poþhenols and flavonoids in
plants, that are known to be protective against
cancer, contain several hydroxyl groups and only
one activated carbonyl, and can function as
antioxidants and interact with "estrogen
receptors." However, like vitamin C, they can be
oxidized to produce arrays of multiple activated
carbonyls, with strong electron withdrawing
(oxidative) effects (Son, et al., 2010). Their inter-
actions with the body's oxidative systems have
hardly been studied, but fisetin and a few others
are known to be pro-oxidants in the body.
Salicylic acid, aspirin's main metabolite, is a
phenolic acid, and its metabolic effects have been5
studied in a liule more detail. The fact that the
inflammation-promoting enzymes, aromatase,
cyclooxygenase, and nitric oxide synthase, which
are inhibited by an oxidizing environment are also
inhibited by aspirin, would strongly suggest that
aspirin and salicylic acid are functioning as
pro-oxidants. In studies with yeast, aspirin is a
pro-oxidant (Famrgia, et al., 2013), and inhibits
the fermentation of glucose (Balzan, et a1., 2004).
The "reducing power," GSH/GSSG, is lowered by
aspirin (Sapienza and Balzan, 2005). When the
yeast is grown in acetate, glycerol, or ethanol,
aspirin doesn't lower the reducing power as much
as when glucose is the fuel. Glucose is a relatively
pro-oxidant fuel.
Aspirin's protective effects in cancer are now
well known, but its use in treating cancer patients
is very limited. Cancer's intrinsically high antioxi-
dant reducing povrer, and the counteracting
beneficial pro-oxidant effects of ascorbic acid,
flavonoids, and aspirin, have taken a long time to
be recognized. For more than 50 years, the public
has been very conscious ofthe biological dangers
of free radical oxidation, and the protective
effects of antioxidants.
Oxidative damage, such as lipid peroxidation,
is a seriously harmful phenomenon. Aspirin and
the bioflavonoids are powerfully protective
against lipid peroxidation and the DNA mutations
and protein damage triggered by the most toxic
free radical, the hydroxyl radical. They can act
directly as hydroxyl radical scavengers, so it has
been assumed that this is the way they work in
cells, but their main action there seems to be by
improving the oxidative state of the cell.
Some radicals are produced in mitochondria,
but effective mitochondrial oxidation of glucose
minimizes that source of radicals. The most
important source of hydroxyl radicals during
stress is the ferrous ion, a reduced form of iron,
for example the iron released when heme oxyge-
nous degrades heme and produces carbon monox-
ide. Carbon monoxide, or hypoxia, increases the
cell's reductive power, keeping iron in the
reduced state that produces hydroxyl radicals
(Zhang and Piantadosi, 1992). 'When the cell is in
a reduced state, vitamin C is one of the reductants
reacting with iron to produce hydroxyl radicals(Hara, et â1., 2009). Like aspirin, the
antioxidanlpro-oxidant flavonoids typically
increase mitochondrial respiration and reduce
inflammation.
When cancer metabolism increases the
amount of lactate in the blood, increased breath-
ing lowers the carbon dioxide in the blood
(Gargaglioni, et al., 2003), and the loss of CO2
affects metabolism and physiology at all levels.
When CO2 is increased, the redox balance of the
cell is shifted in the direction of oxidation
(Mel'nychuk, et al., 1977), the use of glucose for
growth and fat synthesis is inhibited, and the
Krebs cycle is activated (Mel'nychuk, et al.,
1e78).
Inescapable cellular excitation shifts cells into
the characteristic cancer-like metabolism, and
various anesthetics (e.9., propofol, a general
anesthetic, and lidocaine, a local anesthetic) have
been found to reduce tumor proliferation and
inflammation. Lidocaine can be used systemically
in small doses, even by transdermal absorption.
Opioids stimulate cancer growth and metastasis,
but they are still often used. (Byrne, et a1., 2016.)
In severe prolonged stress, the body's stress-
limiting parasympathetic nervous system can
become counter-productive, promoting excitotox-
icity, inflammation, and tumor growth. Although
it's known that the growth and invasiveness of
several types of cancer are stimulated by muscar-
inic cholinergic signals (including organophos-
phate insecticides), there seems to be little inter-
est in using belladonna or atropine for treatment.
Anticholinergic drugs can alleviate some of the
symptoms of cancer, as well as contributing to a
restoration of normal metabolism. Histamine and
serotonin are other metabolic cancer promoters
for which there are safe antagonists.
Progesterone affects all of the features of
cancer metabolism in the right way.
The belief that the only way to eliminate
cancer is to kill "every malignant cell" including
the "cancer stem cells" was based on the belief
that cancer is the result of genetic changes. Even
as people are moving away from absolute genetic
determinism and are recognizing that there is such
a thing as cancer metabolism, they are still focus-
ing on the need to kill the cancer cells, using a6
combination of surgery, radiation, and
chemotherapy.
Recently, an article in the New York Times
Sunday Magazine (Sam Apple, "Starving the
Beast," May 15, 2016) about the new interest in
killing cancer metabolically, quoted James
Watson, of DNA fame, as saying "I never thought,
until about two months ago, I'd ever have to learn
the Krebs cycle. Now I realize I have to." A
thorough understanding of the Krebs cycle could
lead to an interest in the Pasteur effect, and a
reconsideration of the nature of cancer.
REFERENCES
Nutrition. 2002 Jan;18(1):20-5. Effect of age on
substrate oxidation during total parenteral nutrition.
Al-Jaouni R(1), Schneider SM, Rampal P, Hébuterne X.
Sam Apple, NYT May 15,2016, on page MM64 of the
Sunday Magazine.
Ukr Biokhim Zh. 1975 May-Jun;47(3):352-7. [Krebs
cycle in tissue of rats subjected to combined effect of hyper-
capnia, hypoxia and cooling], Baev VI, Drukina MA,
Valeeva GA, Volkova ZA.
Microbiology. 2004 Jan;150(Pt 1):109-15. Aspirin
commits yeast cells to apoptosis depending on carbon
source. Balzan R, Sapienza K, Galea DR, Vassallo N, Frey
H, Bannister WH.
Can J Anaesth.2016 Feb;63(2):184-92. Can anesthetic-
analgesic technique during primary cancer surgery affect
recuffence or metastasis? Byme K, Levins KJ, Buggy DJ.
Carcinogenesis. 2004 Apr;25(4):585-96. Cellular
protein kinase C isozyme regulation by exogenously deliv-
ered physiological disulfides--implications of oxidative
protein kinase C regulation to cancer prevention. Chu F,
Chen LH, O'Brian CA.
FEMS Yeast Res. 2013 Dec;13(8):755-68. Aspirin-
induced apoptosis of yeast cells is associated with mitochon-
drial superoxide radical accumulation and NAD(P)H
oxidation. Famrgia G, Bannister WH, Vassallo N, Balzan R.
Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2003 Oct 16;138(l):37-44.
Lactate as a modulator of hypoxia-induced hyperventilation.
Gargaglioni LH, Bicego KC, Steiner AA, Branco LG.
Cold Spring Harb Syrnp Quant Biol. 20ll;76:12l-7.
Surviving starvation: essential role of the ghrelin-growth
hormone axis. Goldstein JL, Zhao TJ, Li RL, Sherbet DP,
Liang G, Brown MS.
Toxicology. 2009 Oct I ;264(l -2):69-73. Involvement of
extracellular ascorbate and iron in hydroxyl radical genera-
tion in rat striatum in carbon monoxide poisoning. Hara S,
Mizukami H, Mukai T, Kurosaki K, Kuriiwa F, Endo T.
Ukr Biokhim Zh (1978). 1995 May-Jun;67(3):84-92.
[Role of low molecular weight metabolites as natural regula-
tors of metabolisml. Mel'nychuk DO, Mykùaii VO.Ukr Biokhim Zh.1977 Sep-Oct;49(5):86-93. [Effect of
carbonic acid concentration in blood on content of keto-
acids and redox state of nicotinamide coenzymes in rabbit
tissuesl. Mel'nychuk DO, Skoryk LV, Scholz C, Mitsyk EV,
GulyMF.
Amino Acids. 2016 Apr 30. Creatine supplementation
with methylglyoxal: a potent therapy for cancer in experi-
mental models. Pal A, Roy A, Ray M.
Clin Sci (Lond). 2005 Aug;109(2):177-82. Specific
effect of arachidonic acid on inducible nitric oxide synthase
mRNA expression in human osteoblastic cells. Priante G,
Musacchio E, Pagnin E, Calò LA, Baggio B.
Carcinogenesis. 20 I 0 Aug;3 I (8) : 1 4 42-9. P iceaÍannol, a
catechol-type polyphenol, inhibits phorbol ester-induced
NF- {kappa} B activation and cyclooxygenase-2 expression in
human breast epithelial cells: cysteine 179 of IKK{beta} as a
potential target. Son PS, Park SA, Na HK, Jue DM, Kim S,
Surh YJ.
FEMS Yeast Res. 2005 Dec;5(12):1207-13. Metabolic
aspects of aspirin-induced apoptosis in yeast. Sapienza K,
Balzan R.
Vopr Onkol. 1983;29(12):12-7. [Tumor-induced
hypoglycemia and bioelectric activity of the brain in cancer
patientsl Shapot VS, Davydova IG, Karetnikov IuP,
Seregin GI.
The Biological Bulletin 96,2 (Ãpnl 1949): 140-16L.
"Free-Energy Relations and Contraction of Actomyosin."
Szent-Gyorgyi, Albert.
Vopr Med Khim. 1971 Jul-Aug;17(4):407-11. [Possi-
bility of achieving the Pasteur effect by ascites carcinoma
cells in vivol. Tagi-zade SB, Shapot VS.
J Clin Invest. 1992 Oct;90(4):1193-9. Mitochondrial
oxidative stress after carbon monoxide hypoxia in the
rat brain. ZhangJ, Piantadosi CA.