A Biophysical Approach to 
Altered Consciousness  
                                                                        Dr. Raymond F. Peat1 
Ordinary chemical and biological thinking 
tends to emphasize special functions at the 
expense of general and organismic processes. I 
want to suggest some of the ways in which 
"physical state" ideas can bring generality to the 
complex biochemistry of consciousness and 
behavior. 
I use the phrase "physical state" to suggest that 
life, and its pathological and evolutionary 
modifications, can profitably be considered as a 
special "state of matter." The liquid crystalline 
state, with its various degrees of order, is a good 
example of another special state of matter. Living 
material is peculiar in being able to use external 
energy to increase its order without having to 
reduce its temperature; nerves and muscles, for 
example, consume ATP and CrP when they 
"fire," and they are able to return to their resting, 
sensitive state as long as energy is available. 
These active and resting states differ in various 
ways, such as preference for sodium or potassium 
ions, volume (Morocz-Juhasz and Orkenyi, 
1966), and even in the freedom and average 
alignment of their 
1 Raymond F. Peat, Director , Blake College, Eugene, 
Oregon, and Nutritional Consultant, Medical Diet Service, 
Portland, Oregon. M.A. General Studies, University of 
Oregon, 1960. Ph.D., Biology, University of Oregon, 
1972. 300'/2 N. Jefferson, Eugene, Oregon 97402. water molecules (Damadian, 1971; Fritz and Swift, 
1967). 
These two states, active and resting, can also be 
characterized, respectively, as hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic (Tasaki and Hallett, 1973; Ungaret 
al., 1959); as sodium-loving, and potassium-
loving; as inefficient and efficient (Peat and 
Soder-wall, 1973). 
The all-or-nothing impulse of a neuron is not 
the only known or plausible (Ressler, 1972; Cope, 
1971) mechanism of nervous communication. 
Nevertheless, all forms of cell conductivity are 
subject to modification by any process which 
shifts the equilibrium in either direction from the 
normal resting state— toward excessive 
"readiness," or toward incomplete restoration of 
the resting sensitive state. Russian biologists are 
most active in studying the changes that occur in 
tissue exhaustion (Nasonov and Aleksandrov, 
1940) —e.g., increased dy e uptake, decreased 
electrical conductivity—but Crile (1936) and 
others several decades ago discovered some of the 
basic electrical properties of tissue related to 
consciousness. 
If such tissue conductivity is a gross aspect of 
the kind of conduction which maintains our 
perceptual model of the world, we would expect a 
disturbed "state equilibrium," through its effect on 
conductivity, to alter our perceptions in general 
ways, such as spatial expansion 
                                                                                189 ORTHOMOLECULAR PSYCHIATRY, VOLUME 4, NUMBER 3, 1975, Pp. 189-199  
or foreshortening (New bold, 1972a; Leonov and 
Lebedev, 1971). Since such perceptual changes 
are common in depression, mania, 
"schizophrenia," paranoia, delirium, etc., this 
"physical state" theory would predict that ionic 
and metabolic intervention would be possible to 
relieve those conditions. There is a long history of 
"resonance" models of consciousness, and some 
of them are highly relevant to this holistic and 
physical approach (Pribram and Baron, 1973; 
Barrett, 1969). 
There are many examples of gel hysteresis, in 
which a transition in one direction is easier than a 
return to its previous state. This seems to be what 
happens in the cornea after a prolonged riboflavin 
deficiency: even very high doses of riboflavin fail 
to restore its concentration in the cornea to a 
normal level, as if its solubility in the corneal gel 
had been reduced. 
The monovalent alkali metal ions "bind" to 
themselves more water molecules as their radius 
becomes smaller, i.e., in the series rubidium, 
potassium, sodium, lithium. In this sense, lithium 
can be considered to be "super-sodium," and 
rubidium would be "super-potassium." Their 
affinities for cell proteins are apparently 
determined by their own radius and by the charge 
concentration of sites on the proteins (Ling, 1962; 
Ling, 1969). The presence of these ions in turn 
stabilizes the conformation of the protein-water 
system in such a way that the charge 
concentration of the protein sites continues to 
favor those ions, barring the intervention of a 
stronger influence. These stronger influences may 
include powerfully adsorbed polyions such as 
ATP (Ling, 1969), or certain changes in amino 
acids, or disturbed electronic conditions (Szent-
Gyorgyi, 1968). Glutamic acid increases the cell's 
ability to take up other amino acids, while glycine 
acts in the opposite direction (Troshin, 1966); 
glutamic acid also acts as a "cofactor" with ATP, 
probably sterically, in enabling the cell to take up 
potassium (Ling, 1972). This steric function   
could   account for the interference of synthetic (i.e., a mixture of levo and dextro forms) 
monosodium glutamate with brain development in 
rodents, and sometimes with nerve function in 
humans. Natural glutamic acid would be predicted 
by this theory to facilitate recovery of sensitivity 
in a depressed brain. 
Lithium and rubidium have opposite influences 
on neuroexcitability, as predicted by this physical 
theory of the living state. Damadian (1972) 
emphasizes the importance of this point, because 
"if one tries to explain these data in terms of 
conventional membrane pumps, one is at a 
complete loss to explain why lithium quiets the 
neuro-excitable state and rubidium enhances 
excitability." 
The usual definition of a cell's "energy charge" 
is given in terms of ATP, ADP, and AMP 
(Atkinson, 1968), with a high energy charge —an 
abundance of ATP— corresponding to what I am 
calling the resting state of "readiness." According 
to Szent-Gyorgyi (1972) there is probably another 
sense in which cell proteins can be charged, 
namely, by addition to their "electron pool," 
which is a capacity of washed proteins to reduce 
large amounts of glutathione (discovered in 1925 
by Hopkins; this capacity  is what Racker has 
referred to in his cute phrase "nothing 
dehydrogenase"). Szent-G yorgyi feels that this 
electron pool may provide the energy used to 
drive cell division. This energy seems to be 
derived mainly from glycol ysis, which operates in 
the liquid phase of the cytoplasm. A related 
observation is that agents —e.g., estrogen —that 
promote mitosis also cause a proportionate 
increase in oxygen consumption and reducing 
capacity of whole tissue (Peat, 1972), but that this 
capacity is lost if the cells are disrupted. This 
would suggest that the Hopkins electron pool is 
only a remnant of a larger and more delicately 
balanced pool, which can be kept in balance by 
draining electrons into oxygen as long as that is 
available; some pigments might serve as 
substitutes for oxygen in an emergency. 
Peroxidase and age pigment 
190 BIOPHYSICAL APPROACH TO  ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS  
could   catalyze this “draining” process (Peat, 
1972). 
If such an electron pool is an integral part of the 
protein structure of the cell (Szent-Gyorgyi, 1972, 
has suggested the protei n nitrogens as a likely 
site), then Szent-Gyorgyi's approach becomes a 
perfect complement to Ling's (1969), since the 
charge concentrations on the ion-binding sites of 
proteins are crucial factors in cell regulation in 
Ling's theory. It is well known that electron 
releasing or attracting groups have inductive 
effects through adjoining atoms, and Ling's view is 
that the strong ("cardinal") adsorbents can act 
through such inductive effects on adjoining charge 
concentrations. Szent-Gyorgyi also believes that 
these electrons could regulate the degree of protein 
hydration (1972). 
The source of these electrons is likely to be 
NADH and/or NADPH, which are produced 
abundantly in the cytoplasm and which contain 
high-energy electrons (NADPH provides the 
energy for many biosynthetic reactions). For 
example, NADH and NADPH are the source of 
electrons for reducing glutathione, which in turn is 
in equilibrium with the SH groups of proteins 
(Peat, 1972). Niacin is a component of these 
molecules that are so important in energy delivery. 
In a niacin-deficient animal, estrogen has no 
effect, so if estrogen is acting through its influence 
on the electron pool, NADH and NADPH seem to 
be necessary for energizing that pool. Of course 
the biosynthetic function would also be damaged 
in a niacin deficiency. 
The fact that large doses of niacin can often 
cure schizophrenia (Hoffer, 1966; Cott, ASA 
Publication) suggests that in this disease the 
energy charge of neurons may be low. This would 
affect the ability of cells to retain certain ions and 
the known mineral changes that occur in 
schizophrenia (Newbold, 1972b) may be similar to 
those that appear in general stress reactions, 
though possibly with the brain being most 
affected. A low electron pool in schizophrenia 
might account for the claim that schizophrenics seldom develop cancer, since the cancer state, 
like other mitosis-favoring -states, presumably 
requires a very large or excessive electron pool. 
(The resistance of schizophrenics to virus 
infections, allergies, and histamine, Carter and 
Watts, 1971, would suggest lower susceptibility to 
cancerization by viruses or irritation.) In the 
normal states, proteins would be "charged" only 
enough to function, bind water, etc., and then 
energy production would be limited. In a sense, 
the schizophrenic would be "too weak" even to 
produce cancer. 
Szent-Gyorgyi (1951) has shown that a given 
process can have opposite effects in different 
tissues, depending on whether that tissue is already 
above or below its maximum capacity to produce 
the particular effect. Recognizing that cells can 
have different degrees of structure according to 
their normal function and position in the develop-
mental gradient, we should look for concepts that 
can combine generality with recognition of 
individuality, rather than grasping for 
undergeneralized answer s such as "special 
receptor" theories. 
Many people have suggested that pigments such 
as melanin may be able to function as electron 
acceptors, as an alternative to oxygen —no one 
has yet thought of a better explanation for the 
occurrence of pigments in the nervous system 
(e.g., the substantia nigra ), in association with 
rapid mitosis (Florey, 1966), e.g., melanoma and 
skin irritation, or in hormone imbalance or vitamin 
deficiency (Davis, 1965), e.g., pellagra, Addison's 
disease, "melasma of pregnancy." We could 
imagine the pigment receiving electrons that 
"overflowed" from the electron pool, in case of a 
control error, or that leaked out of the pool, in case 
of structurally defective protein-gel systems. A 
phase shift of the cytoplasm toward "melting" 
would be the common event. Discontinuity of the 
proteins probably causes the low conductivity. 
The fact that abnormal pigmentation occurs   in   
a   niacin   deficiency  and   in 
                                                                                  191 ORTHOMOLECULAR PSYCHIATRY, VOLUME 4, NUMBER 3, 1975, Pp. 189 -199 
association with psychosis (Creinor, 1970; 
Proctor, 1972) suggests that a metabolic or 
structural energy problem may be the key to both 
conditions. The observation that ascorbic acid with 
its high electron energy can be helpful in 
psychosis (Cott, ASA Publication) as well as in B-
vitamin deficiencies has the same implication —
ascorbic acid has both structural (Davis, 1965) and 
energetic effects. The electron donor potential of a 
substance has been successfu lly used to predict its 
effect as a hallucinogen (Kang and Green, 1970), 
and combinations of donor and acceptor 
substances induce muscle contraction (Kaminer, 
1962) and may be involved in dyskinesias 
(Proctor, 1972). 
Usually we think of both "error" and correction   
as   being  on   the   molecular level.   However,   
control   processes   are likely to be of a physical 
nature first, followed   by   a   chemical   adaptive   
response.    For    example,    if    oxygen    is 
physically restricted, the resulting lactic acid tends 
to restore the oxygen supply by    causing    
vasodilation.    Transmitter granules in   nerve 
endings likewise are believed   to   be   ruptured   
by   physical changes in the cytoplasm, leading to 
the release of transmitter substances. Thus, we 
might look first for unusual functional states, such 
as stressed consumption of oxygen or glucose, or a 
nutritional block to such consumption, as 
provoking the release or synthesis of unusually 
high or low amounts of regulatory substances. 
Even vasodilators or vasoconstrjctors are 
ultimately regulators of the cytoplasmic "phase"; 
some hormones may do this more subtly, though. 
In this connection, it   is   interesting that   a 
vasoconstrictor action has finally been 
demonstrated for LSD. The action of niacin as a 
vasodilator may be significant in its ability to 
block intoxication by hallucinogens (personal 
observation),   as well   as to   block   the 
symptoms of schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenics typically have an abnormal 
serotonin concentration in their pineal gland. The 
pineal is rich in both serotonin and its N-
acetylated, O-methy-lated derivative,   melatonin,  which  has the function of concentrating melanin, 
making it seemingly disappear by withdrawing it 
from the extremities of the melanocytes. An 
interesting complexity is that the hormone is 
chemically closely related to the pigment that it 
regulates. The enzyme peroxidase, which is almost 
universally induced by irritation or stress, is 
involved in the synthesis of melanin (Proctor, 
1972). The same enzyme can efficiently dispose of 
both electrons and oxygen (Peat, 1972). 
The pineal is closely associated with the optic 
thalamus and the reticular system, and is 
functionally involved in response to light, and is 
antagonistic to the gonads' production of sex 
hormones (Kinson and Peat, 1971). Its 
involvement in the visual system suggests it would 
be important in percep tion and dreaming, and 
related to agents that either stimulate or suppress 
the dream-consciousness, such as LSD or alcohol. 
A common item of folklore is that alcoholics 
are likely to be lightly pigmented people; sexual 
problems are often suggested, but usually are 
treated as an effect rather than a cause of 
alcoholism. Sensitivity and imaginativeness are 
frequently attributed to alcoholics. (Newsweek, 
July 2, 1973, reported successful use of lithium 
salts to treat alcoholism; this could be interpreted 
as acting to depress the "dream process," lowering 
excitability.) 
Rat experiments (Celle, 1971; Science News, 
1973) have shown that the pineal gland is involved 
in preference for ethanol: injected melatonin 
makes them prefer alcohol, as does keeping them 
in the dark. Removal of the pineal prevents this 
response to the dark. 
It is well known that alcohol suppresses 
dreaming, usually for several days following 
intoxication, while the alcohol remains in the 
body. The body's "need to dream" is temporarily 
suppressed, but catches up later with a night or 
two of unusually intense dreaming. Continuous 
intoxication presumably builds up an increasing 
"dream pressure" that can eventually break 
through as waking dreams, or "delirium tremens." 
192 BIOPHYSICAL APPROACH TO  ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS  
LSD works the other way, stimulating intense 
dreams even when awake, but causing a few 
dreamless nights when its direct effect wears off. 
(Para-chloro-phenylalanine, which blocks 
serotonin synthesis, not only interferes with sleep 
— especially R.E.M. sleep —but it causes rats to 
reject alcohol, and to become hypersexual, 
Campbell, 1970). The dream process involves 
greater conductivity through the head, whether it 
happens during sleep or when awake (my 
unpublished observations). This suggests that it 
corresponds to a high efficiency "resting" state. 
It seems likely that human alcoholics, like the 
alcoholic rats, have excessive melatonin. This 
would account for the idea about their light 
pigmentation and possibly for an associated sex 
problem, since melatonin also suppresses the sex 
hormones (Kinson and Peat, 1971). Serotonin and 
reticular formation implants also have this 
suppressive action; male and female hormones 
may respond differently to serotonin and 
melatonin (Kinson and Peat, 1971). 
Drinking would tend not only to suppress the 
dream consciousness (imagination may be a 
source of frustration), but may also antagonize the 
antigonadal action of the overactive pineal, though 
I don't know of any study that would indicate 
this —alcohol's o ccasional ability to increase 
sex hormone action is generally attributed to liver 
damage. 
To the extent that psychosis is associated with 
excessive pigmentation, we might guess that it 
corresponds to a deficiency of melatonin; 
abnormal levels of serotonin (precursor of 
melatonin) in the pineals of schizophrenics could 
be interpreted in this way. 
Stress, among its many effects, causes an 
increased synthesis of uric acid (Davis, 1965), 
possibly as a useful adaptation, since uric acid 
levels correlate positively with mental activity and 
efficiency. However, uric acid can catalyze the 
oxidation of epinephrine (Proctor, 1972), and if 
this leads to elevated adrenochrome levels, it 
might interfere with cytoplasmic gel structure by acting on glutathione (Mattock and Heacock, 
1965). 
Migrainoids typically have unusually vivid 
visual imagery and high electrical activity of the 
brain stem; a sudden drop in serotonin   level is 
considered to   be responsible for the swelling 
blood vessels that cause the pain, scotoma, etc. 
The travelling symptoms described by Reich and 
others may indicate that a certain mass of vessels 
exceeds the organism's vasoconstriction   capacity;   
the demonstration that autonomic training can stop 
a migraine (by raising the temperature of the 
hands), the fact that sleep or orgasms can often 
end the symptoms,   or that rectal stuffing can 
induce a headache, would be consistent with this 
idea. The "substitution" of bronchitis or piles (both 
involving    vasodilation)     for    migraine would    
probably    be    conditioned    by factors such as 
diet, activity,   posture, etc. A high metabolic rate 
of any tissue will tend to cause reflexive 
vasodilation to maintain adequate blood 
circulation, as will relative starvation of the tissue, 
as in    a    riboflavin    deficiency.     In    the 
migrainoid person,   high brain activity, low blood 
sugar, and disturbed intestinal absorption may be 
interacting factors. Chernigovskii (1967) has 
discussed some of the ways in which brain, blood 
sugar, and the intestine can interact. 
The pituitary hormone, MSH (melano-phore-
stimulating hormone), which causes darkening 
by dispersion of melanin, seems to act by way of 
interfering with glycolysis (Turner, 1966, Wright, 
1955). High pH and hypo-osmolarity (Turner, 
1966) can also cause dispersion, which suggests 
that a phase transition (gel to sol) is involved. 
Kinosita (1953) has reported exactly this gel-sol 
transition and has also demonstrated that the 
pigments seem to follow electrical gradients 
within the cell. 
The idea of an altered state of the protein-water 
system makes it easier to see the darkening event, 
pigment dispersion, as a single process: deficient 
melatonin, excess MSH, deficient niacin, or 
irritation, would all promote the low 
                                                                                  193 ORTHOMOLECULAR PSYCHIATRY, VOLUME 4, NUMBER 3, 1975, Pp. 189 - 199 
conductivity,   low   efficiency,   anti-dreaming 
state. 
During exhausting fevers and after drinking too 
much, I have experienced a defective kind of 
dream, a kind of analytical, verbal delirium, in 
which one word only leads to another word. In 
place of fluid and integrated imagery, there was 
just a kind of fizzly yellow, or swarming orange, 
activity. Mental satisfaction becomes impossible 
in that state. (Green and blue usually seem to be 
suppressed in that kind of state.) 
Since I believe mental imagery is the real, 
working structure of language, I think a related 
kind of damage to the dream system, or dream 
metabolism, would account for the peculiar nature 
of "schizophrenic" verbalization. 
The damage would be both energetic and 
structural and would act by an effect on tissue 
conductivity. (An importa nt difference between 
the cancer state, Peat and Soderwall, 1973, and 
schizophrenia, on the cell level, would be that 
cancer depends on glycolysis, while glycolysis is 
specifically depressed in schizophrenia, according 
to this view.) 
This theory, unlike othe rs used as a basis for 
Orthomolecular psychiatry, offers a great range of 
substances that may be used simultaneously and 
possibly provides a better and more general basis 
for understanding synergis ms (such as Ling's 
ATP-glutamate-potassium interaction). It 
specifically opposes the premature assumption that 
any particular metabolic error is genetic and 
proposes instead the investigation of environmen-
tal factors (including the uterine environment) that 
could alter the physical state of the cytoplasm. The 
observations of poor muscle tone in very young 
infants who later become schizophrenic has been 
used to argue for a purely genetic origin, but it 
could as well reflect a bad uterine environment, 
such as could be caused by an inadequate placenta. 
IMPLIED THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES  
This biophysical theory argues that altered consciousness (and the behavior it produces) is a 
question of both bioenergetics and "bio-
microstructure," and implies that a therapy should 
attempt to create the desirable state of structure 
and energy by intervention at crucial —and 
possibly numerous-points. 
If it is possible to introduce ATP directly, its 
use would be suggested by the theory, since it is 
one of the central points in both energy 
metabolism and structure. Creatine phosphate, 
which is in equilibrium with ATP, might be an 
alternative way of raising ATP concentration since 
it is at a higher energy level and would not 
introduce additional adenosine, thus allowing a 
higher ratio of ATP to AMP, if not an absolutely 
higher concentration of ATP. ATP has been found 
to improve the functional state of the brain 
(vestibular analyser) when used with Pyridoxine, 
increasing its stability and shortening postrotatory 
nystagmus (Lapayev et al., 1971). Also, ATP 
promotes healing of corneal wounds at high 
altitudes, when applied locally with 4-methyluracil 
(Vovsi, 1972). Since ATP hydrolyzes rapidly in 
blood, it might achieve these effects partly through 
vasodilation. Recent in vitro  studies show that 
ATP prevents leaking of enzymes and other 
proteins from cells (Science News, 1974). 
Other "orthomolecules" besides niacin would, 
according to this view, include potassium, 
magnesium, vitamin E (improving oxygen supply, 
facilitating cell retention of proteins, and even, 
according to Matusis, 1971, increasing ATP 
content), L-glutamic acid, inositol (stabilizer of 
cells and proteins against denaturing or 
"dehydrating" influences, Webb, 1965), the other 
B vitamins, vitamin C, and anabolic steroids (e.g., 
testosterone, progesterone, ginseng, el-
eutherococcus) to promote protein synthesis and 
retention of potassium and creatine and ATP. 
Progesterone may be particularly important in 
female schizophrenics, since it commonly seems 
to promote emotional stability and even has an 
anesthetic function in large doses (Selye, 1967). 
Vitamins A, E, C, and B-|2 
194 BIOPHYSICAL APPROACH TO  ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS  
either mimic or potentiate testosterone to some 
degree (Sharaf and Comaa, 1970). I am currently 
investigating the function of folic acid in allergic, 
immune, and perceptual processes. 
The electronic aspect of the cell's energy charge 
suggests that cysteine or reduced glutathione 
might be desirable, especially if there is evidence 
that glutathione is being destroyed by something 
like adrenochrome. (Sulphydryl blocking can 
impair glycolysis, as can a niacin deficiency.) The 
theory of donor-acceptor interaction might 
eventually lead to a specific understanding of the 
"electronic leak" and how best to intervene, 
though it might not be such a discrete problem as 
some theorists have hoped. 
The glutathione peroxidase which is released 
when mitochondria swell (Green and O'Brien, 
1970) might be involved in the "electron leak," 
and so things which cause uncoupling of oxidative 
phosphorylation and mitochondrial swelling, such 
as unsaturated fatty acids (Racker, 1965) should 
probably be controlled in the diet. 
Since the normal person has sharp diurnal 
cycles of brain activity (reflecting a proper 
concentration of the "brain" amines) and many 
psychotics have flattened cycles, involving 
disturbed sleep as well as disturbed waking 
consciousness, cyclic light stimulation of skin and 
head might be desirable to support regular cyclic 
activity of the pineal gland and brain. This would 
also tend to increase sex hormone production by 
the gonads (Kinson and Peat, 1971). The brain's 
"background activity" might have what in the heart 
is called the "staircase" effect, in which structural 
readiness seems to leak aw ay if the tissue doesn't 
become active often enough-"function builds 
structure, and structure produces function" (Szent-
Gyorgyi,1972). 
"Rhythmotherapy," the imposition of normal 
rhythms, is being done with the apparatus called 
"LIDA," which produces pulsed light, sound, and 
UHF currents, and a breeze on the face (Belenkiy, 
1973). 
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy has been used in 
relieving psychotic symptoms (Kondrashchenko et al., 1971), but this doesn't seem appropriate for 
creating lasting improvement. The opposite cond-
ition, i.e., high elevation, has caused lasting 
improvement in psychosis (Mir-rakhimov, 1972) 
and many somatic and psychosomatic conditions, 
and the mechanism (according to the animal 
studies of F. Meyersonet al., 1972) is the 
adaptively increased number and efficiency of 
mitochondria in the brain, resulting in improved 
learning ability. Also, MAO activity decreases at 
high elevation while respiratory effectiveness 
increases (Khvatova et al., 1973). 
In a pharmacological approach, reduced 
expenditure of glycogen, ATP, and creatine 
phosphate (Dardymov, 1971), combined with 
increased protein synthesis (Rozin, 1971) and 
increased resistance of cells and organisms to 
stress, can be achieved with ginseng, 
eleutherococcus, and 2-benzyl-benzimidazole 
(Rusin, 1971), used singly or in combination. 
Piracetam, an analog of GABA, improves 
learning, increases resistance to toxins or oxygen 
deprivation, and increases bilateral symmetry of 
function in the cerebral hemispheres (Giurgea, 
1973). 
The importance of improving protein synthesis 
is implied by the observation that serum from 
schizophrenics inhibits protein synthesis in rat 
cerebral hemispheres, hypothalamus, and 
cerebellum (Us and Bozhko, 1971). 
Several people (e.g., Manukhin and Turnayev, 
1971) have suggested an identity of acetylcholine, 
epinephrine, and serotonin "receptors," and this 
structural-energetic theory similarly would 
suggest that "specific receptor" 
psychopharmaceutical approaches lack a proper 
physiological basis. But studies of psychoactive 
agents can contribute to a general understanding of 
cell and brain function and can possibly support an 
Orthomolecular approach. For example, when 
excessive cholinergic activity is involved in 
nervous dysfunction (and excessive acetylcholine 
can block  cholinergic   synapses,    ll'yuchenov,    
1971), 
                                                                                    195 ORTHOMOLECULAR PSYCHIATRY, VOLUME 4, NUMBER 3, 1975, Pp. 189 - 199 
cholinolytic cell stabilizers (e.g., acetylcholine or 
tetramethylammonium with the adamantyl radical 
substituted for the N-methyl group, Kharkevich, 
1971), might be used to stabilize nerve function 
while actual repair processes occur under 
Orthomolecular therapy. The adamantyl radical is 
also useful in treatment of Parkinsonism and 
viral infections (ll'icheva, 1973) again 
suggesting a general biophysical structuring effect, 
as in cholinolytic processes. The "Pavlovian dose" 
of caffeine which produces sedation is very small 
and probably acts by increasing the degree of 
structuring of cells; larger doses, which would 
promote an "adrenergic" state, might intensify the 
symptoms of schizophrenia or alcoholism. The 
cholinergic and muscarinic drugs (e.g., 
prostigmine) might shift the nervous balance in the 
right direction if the cholinergic synapses aren't 
blocked by excess acetylcholine. 
The Russians have two electronic techniques 
that may serve as alternatives to ECT and which 
may in fact give some insight into the effects of 
ECT on the brain. Electrosleep (produced by 5-
100 Hz. pulses, with peak current of 5-8 m.a. 
applied to the eyes— negative pole— and mastoid 
process —positive pole) has been used in treating 
"functional disorders of the CNS," autonomic and 
endocrine functional disorders, etc. (Studnitsyna, 
1972). High frequency (5000-6000 Hz.) currents 
have been found to stimulate the brain (Rubakov, 
1973). 
In embryonic muscle cells, when the 
"depolarizing fast acetylcholine receptors" are 
blocked by snake venom, then the cell's "slow 
polarizing acetylcholine receptors" are revealed 
(Patrick et al., 1972). This type of receptor may be 
responsible for the "trophic" influences which 
maintain high polarization and which seem to be 
involved in such things as the "Bowditch 
staircase." Electrical stimulation may act on 
similar "receptors" in neurons. 
Vitamin B6 is a coenzyme in carboxyl-ation 
reactions and as such is involved in the synthesis 
of serotonin from 5-hy-droxy-tryptophan, and also in the formation of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric 
acid) from glutamic acid. In the "resting" state, 
cell water seems to be more orderly, as if it had a 
lower "structural temperature." Some enzymes are 
inactivated by cold and presumably would be 
inactive in the resting state. GAD (glutamic acid 
decarboxylase) has been found to be among these 
peculiar enzymes, and this is the enzyme which 
decarboxylates glutamic acid, producing GABA. 
GABA has been shown to be a mediator of 
nervous inhibition on the basis of several criteria, 
including heightened GABA liberation in sleep 
and near-sleep (Sytinskiy, 1973). 
This would seem appropriate if the physical 
state of cell water is participating in brain 
regulation. During brain "activation" or 
exhaustion, this enzyme should become more 
active, producing more GABA and presumably 
thereby promoting rest and restoration. Since 
hydroxylamine is an inhibitor of GABA 
degradation, it would be interesting to see what 
effect it has on psychoses, though it may be too 
toxic to be practical; the same might apply to 
hydrazine, which is used with considerable 
success in inoperable cancer and often induces 
sleep as well as preventing cachexia. It raises the 
level of ATP systemic ally. Injected GABA is 
usually considered to enter only the fetal or infant 
brain, because of the "blood brain barrier" of the 
more mature organism. However, Nasonov and 
his students have shown that many kinds of stress 
will eliminate the barrier and that it can be 
interpreted as a physical state of the neuron, 
governing solubility. This suggests that GABA 
itself may be able to enter the brain and exert a 
beneficial inhibitory action if the brain is in a state 
of exhaustion from stress. 
Another enzyme that should be investigated 
from this point of view is NADase, since it too 
shows what may be a sensitivity to structure: in 
cell homoge-nates, it is sufficiently active to 
destroy NAD and thus stop glycolysis at the triose 
phosphate stage (Florey, 1966); it is inhibited by 
nicotinamide,   but   is also 
196 BIOPHYSICAL APPROACH TO  ALTERED CONSCIOUSNESS  
relatively inactive in the int act brain, at least in the 
intact non-schizophrenic brain. 
Magnetic fields presumably act biologically by 
acting on the structure of water, and Kholodov has 
established that a continuous sinusoidal magnetic 
field has a sedative and inhibiting effect, 
modifying the EEC and raising the level of GABA 
in the brain (Speranskiy, 1973). The activity of 
oxygen increases in magnetically treated water 
(Speranskiy, 1973), so there might be a direct 
effect on energy production. 
Since DMSO has been used successfully for 
treating mental retardation, with removal of 
cataracts as a side effect, its effect of "structuring" 
water, or lowering its "activity" according to a 
Soviet study, and of promoting oxidation of 
glucose by quinone (my unpublished observation) 
suggests that it might improve the function of 
nerves and other cells by promoting the desired 
high energy state. 
During an epileptic seizu re, a localized vascular 
"blanching" has been observed in the exposed 
brain. Since vasoconstriction occurs in the brain 
when the concentration of carbon dioxide is low, 
such a spasm might occur when metabolic 
inefficiency interferes with the production of 
carbon dioxide. Thus epilepsy and schizophrenia 
might benefit from similar treatments. This theory 
suggests that we should look for more general 
mechanisms in known therapies: for example, the 
ability of Dilantin to lower insulin levels could 
improve the supply of glucose to the brain. 
One of the older therapeutic uses of niacin is in 
the treatment of "trench mouth," which is a 
reaction to stress (Cohen, 1973), though a protein 
deficiency is also proba bly involved. Since the 
gums are responsive to many agents (including 
Dilantin and cigarette smoking) and are easy to 
inspect, they may provide an additional means for 
following the course of recovery when schizo-
phrenia is being treated with niacin. 
REFERENCES  
MOROCZ-JUHASZ, M., and ORKENYI, J.: Volume Changes During Muscle Activity. Acta Biochem. Biophys. Acad. Sci. Hung. 1(1); 55-60, 1966.  
DAMADIAN, R.: Tumor Detection by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. Science 
171: 1151, 1971.  
FRITZ, 0. G., and SWIFT, T. J,: Th e State of Water in Polarized and 
Depolarized Frog Nerves; a Proton Magn etic Resonance Study. Biophysical J. 
7: 675-687, 1967.  
TASAKI, I , and HALLETT, M.: Bioenerg etics of Nerve Excitation   
Bioenergetics 3: 65-79, 1973.  
UNGAR, G et al.: Effect of Insulin on Sulphydryl Groups in Muscle. Nature 
183:4653, 49-50, 1959.  
PEAT, R., and SODERWALL, A. L.: Energy and Structure in Biological 
Water, Energy and Character, J. Bioenergetic Res  4:3, 34-37, 1973.  
RESSLER, N.: Resonant Energy as a Mechanism for Mental Activity   Physiol. 
Chem. and Physics 4:361-369, 1972.  
COPE, F. W.: Evidence from activation energies for superconductive tunneling 
in biological systems at physiological temperatures. Physiol. Chem. and 
Physics 4:4, 403,  1971.  
NASONOV, D.N , and ALEKSANDROV, V. Ya : The Reactions of Living 
Tissue to External Influences. Pub. A S USSR, Moscow-Leningrad, 1940.  
CRILE, G. W.: The Phenomena of Life; A Radio-Electric Interpretation. New 
York: W.W, Norton and Co., Inc., 1936.  
NEWBOLD, H L. The Use of Vitamin Bj2 in Psychiatrv. Orthomolecular 
Psychiatry 1:1, 27-36, 1972a.  
LEONOV, A., and LEBEDEV, V.: Space and Time Perception by the 
Cosmonaut. Mir. Pubis , Moscow, p. 173, 1971  
P R I B R A M ,  K., and BARON, R : The holographic hypothesis of memory 
structure in brain function and perc eption, mimeographed, distributed by 
author, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 1973.  
BARRETT, T. W.: The Cortex as Interfe rometer. Neuropsychology 7. 135-148, 
1969. 
LING, G N.: A Physical Theory of the Living State: The Association-Induction 
Hypothesis   Blaisdell, N.Y., 1962.  
LING, G N.: A New Model for the Living Cell: a Summary of the Theory and 
Recent Experimental Evidence in its Support. Int. Rev. Cytol   26: 1-6-1, 
1969. 
SZENT-GYORGYI, A.: Bioelectronics. Acad Press, N.Y., 1968.  
T R O S H I N ,  A S.: Problems of Cell Permeability. Pergamon Press, NY., 1966  
LING, G N.: Discussion at conference Anna ls New York Acad   of Sci. p. 376 
of Vol. 196, 1972  
DAMADIAN, R . Discussion at  conference Annals New York Acad, of Sci. p. 
49 of Vol   196. 1972  
ATKINSON, D E : The Energy Charge of the Adenylate Pool as a Regulatory 
Parameter Interaction with Feedback Modifiers   Biochem. 7: 4030-4034, 
1968. 
SZENT-GYORGYI, A.: The Living State.  New York: Acad. Press, 1972.  
PEAT, R : Age-Related Oxidative Changes in the Hamster Uterus. Ph.D. 
Dissertation, University of Oregon, 1972.  
                                                                                  197 ORTHOMOLECULAR PSYCHIATRY, VOLUME 4, NUMBER 3, 1975, Pp. 189 - 199 
COTT, A.: Orthomolecular Treatment: A Biochemical Approach to Treatment 
of Schizophrenia. American  Schizophrenia Assoc, NY.  
HOFFER, A : The Effect of Nicotinic Acid on the Frequency and Duration of 
Rehospitalization of Schizophrenic Pati ents -a Controlled Comparison Study. 
Int. J. Neuropsvchiat 234, 1966.  
NEWBOLD, H L.: Discussion at conference. Annals New York Acad. Sci. p. 
375, Vol. 196, 1972b.  
CARTER,  M ,  and WATTS,  C.  A.  H.:  Possible Biological Advantages    
Among    Schizophrenic    Relatives.     Br.     J Psychiatrv 118: 453-460, 
1971. 
SZENT-GYORGYI, A.: Chemistry of Muscular Contraction. New York, 
Academic Press, 1951.  
FLOREY,  E.: An Introduction to General and Comparative Animal   
Physiology.   Philadelphia:   W.   B.   Saunders   Co p. 336, 1966.  
DAVIS, A : Let's Get Well. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc., 1965.  
GREINOR, A. C: Can   Psychiat. Ass. J. 15: 433, 1970.  
PROCTOR, P.: Electron-transfer Factors in Psychosis and Dyskinesia. Physiol. 
Chem. and Physics 4: 349, 1972.  
KANG, S., and GREEN, J. P.: Steric and electronic relationships among some 
hallucinogenic compounds. Proc Natl   Acad   Sci. ( U S A ) .  67:1, 62-67, 
1970. 
KAMINER, B.: Contractile responses in the presence of Electron Donors and 
Acceptors. Biochem. Biophys . Acta 56, 14-18, 1962.  
KINSON, G. A., and PEAT, F.: The Influe nces of Illumination, Melatonin and 
Pinealectomy on Testicular Function in the Rat. Life Science 10. part I: 259-
269, 1971.  
GELLE, I.: Ethanol Preference in the Rat as a Function-of Photoperiod. Science 
1. 456-459, 1971.  
Alcoholism and a Frisky Pineal Gland. Science News 103: 271, April 28, 1973.  
CAMPBELL, L.: Clues From a Chemical. Science News 98: 287-289, 1970.  
MATTOCK, G. L., and HEACOCK, R. A.: The Chemistry of the 
Aminochromes Part VI. The Reaction of Adrenochrome with Glutathione. 
Can. J. of Chemistry 43: 1965.  
CHERNIGOVSKII, V. N.: Interoceptors. American Psychological Association, 
Washington. 1967.  
TURNER, C. D : General Endocrinology. Philadelphia: Saunders Co., p   17.7, 
1966. 
WRIGHT, P. A : Physiological Responses of Frog Melano-phores in Vitro. 
Physiol. Zool. 28: 204, 1955.  
KINOSITA, H ' Studies on" the Mechanism of Pigment Migration within Fish 
Melanophores with Special Reference to their Electrical Potentials. Annot. 
Zool. Jap, 26' 115-127 1953  
LAPAYEV, E. V., UDALOV, Yu. F., and KHALATOV, O. P.: The 
Pharmacological Effect of Pyridoxine and its Combination With Adenosine 
Triphosphoric Acid on the Functional State of the Vestibular Analysor. 
Zhurnal Ushnykh, Nosoryk i Gorlovykh Bolezney No. 5: 15-19, 1971.  
VOVSI, B. M.: Treatment of Corneal Wounds in High Altitudes. Vestnik 
Oftal'mologii, no. 1: 70-74, 1972.  "ATP: The Finger in the Dike," Science News 106, p. 9, July 6, 1974.  
MATUSIS, L. I.: Effect of administration of alpha-tocopherol to albino rats on 
changes in content of ATP, ADP, and inorganic phosphorus in the skin and 
skeletal muscles due to avitaminosis K. Bull. Exp. Biol. Med. 71(5), p. 542, 
1971. 
WEBB, S. J.: Bound Water in Biological Integrity. Thomas, Springfield, 1965.  
SELYE, H: In Vivo: The Case for a Supramolecular Biology. New York: 
Liveright Publ. Corp., 1967.  
SHARAF, A., and GOMAA, N.: Androgenic ity of Vitamins. Qual. Mater. Veg. 
19:4, 379-384, 1970.  
GREEN, R C, and O'BRIEN, P. J.: The cellular localization of glutathione 
peroxidase and its release from mitochondria during swelling. Biochem. 
Biophys. Acta 197, 131-139, 1970.  
RACKER, E.: Mechanisms in Bioenerg etics. New York: Academic Press, 
1965. 
BELENKIY, B.: LIDA apparatus for biorhythmological studies. Sov. Mold. p. 
4, December 8, 1973.  
KONDRASHCHENKO, V. T., GLANTS, B.  R., and MAYEROVICH, I. M.: 
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy of Hypoxia in Acute Brain Injuries and Acute 
Exogenous Psychoses. Zh. neuropatologii i psikhiatrii, No. 2: 271-277, 1971.  
MIRRAKHIMOV, M. M.: Human High-altitude Pathology in Kirgiz SSR. 
Klinicheskava Meditsina 50:12, 104-109,  1972.  
MEYERSON, F. Z., POMOYNITSKIY, V. D., and YAMPOL'SKAYA, B. A.: 
Role of the Biogenesis of Mitochondria in the Adaptation of the Organism to 
Altitude Hypoxia. Dokl. Ak. Nauk. SSSR Vol. 203:4, 973-976, 1972.  
KHVATOVA, Ye. M., RUBANOVA, N.A., and ZHILINA, I. A.: The Activity 
of Monoaminooxidase and Respiratory Chain Enzyme in Acute Hypoxia. 
Voprosy Meditsinskoy Khimii 19:1, 3-5, 1973.  
DARDYMOV, I. V.: The Effect of Ginse ng and Eleutherococ-cus Preparation 
on Metabolism During Physical Loading. Pp. 76-82 in Protein Synthesis and 
Cell Resistance, Nauka, Leningrad, 1971.  
ROZIN, M. A.: Study of the Role of Protein Synthesis in the Mechanism of 
Action of Pharmacological Substances on Cell Resistance. Nauka, Leningrad, 
1971. 
RUSIN, V. Ya.: The Effect of Dibazole  on the Resistance of Cells to Damage. 
Pp. 58-61 in Protein Synthesis and Cell  Resistance, Nauka, Leningrad, 1971.  
GIURGEA, C: The "Nootropic" approach to the pharmacology of the 
integrative activity of the brain. Conditional Reflex 8:2, 108-115, 1973.  
US, Z. G., and BOZHKO, G. J. H.: Effect of Blood Serum From 
Schizophrenics on the Renewal of Brain Proteins in Rats. Zh. Neuropatologii i 
Psikhiatrii, No. 2: 253-255, 1971.  
MANUKHIN, B. N., and TURNAYEV, T. M.: Identity of Acetylcholine, 
Epinephrine, and Serotonin Receptors. Zh. Evolyutsionnoy Biokhimii i 
Fiziologii, No. 3: 229-237, 1971.  
IL'YUCHENOV, R. Yu.: Some Aspects of the Pharmacology of Memory. 
Aktualnyye Problemy Farmakologii i Farmatsii. 37-43, 1971.  
KHARKEVICH, D. A.: The Effect of Lip ophilic Radicals in the Molecule of 
Curanform Substances on their Mechanism of Action   Dokl. Acad. Nauk. 
SSSR, 198:4, 98 5-988, 1971.  
IL'ICHEVA, S.: Compounds Related to Diamond. Sovetskaya Latviya, p. 3, 
January 1, 1973, Riga.  
198 BIOPHYSICAL APPROACH TO  ALTERED CO NSCIOUSNESS 
STUDNITSYNA, L. A.: Electrosleep as a Therapeutic Factor. Method and 
Indications. Meditsinskaya Sestra, No. 5: 32-34, 1972  
RUBAKOV, A. M.: Characteristics of Equipment Designed to Act Electrically 
on the Organism in Biological Research. Meditsinskaya Tekhnika No. 1: 6-9, 
1973. 
PATRICK, J., HEINEMAN, S. F., LINDSTROM, J., SHUBERT, D., and 
STEINBACH, J. H.: Appearance of  acetylcholine je ceptor during 
differentiation of a myogenic cell line. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 69:10 
2762-2766, 1972  
SYTINSKIY, I. A.: GABA-Inhibitory Mediator in • the Nervous System. 
Pnroda, No. 1: 20-29, 1973.  
SPERANSKIY, A.: Magnetic fi elds. Meditsins kaya Gazeta, p   3: May 5, 1973.  
COHEN, C. I : Prime Site for Manifestation of Psychosomatic Disorders. 
Science News 104: p. 347, December 1, 1973  
199