Ray Peat's Newsletter 
Natural forces within us are the true healers of disease. Hippocrates 
Copyright 2016 Raymond Peat P.O. Box 5764 Eugene OR 97405 November 2016 
Not for republication without written permission. 
Arthritis, Autoimmunity, & Aging 
For several decades it has been known that 
women are from 2 to 10 times more likely than 
men to be affected by an autoimmune disease, 
such as rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus 
erythematosis, SLE, and that the incidence of 
autoimmune disease increases with aging. Most 
physicians believe that autoimmune diseases are 
chronic and progressive, and that, on average, they 
shorten life by several years. It's very common for 
an autoimmune disease in one organ to be associ­
ated with an autoimmune problem in one or more 
other organs. The incidence of heart disease and 
several types of cancer is higher in people with 
SLE or rheumatoid arthritis. 
According to the National Institutes of Health, 
23.5 million people in the US suffer from an 
autoimmune disease, based on studies of 24 differ­
ent "autoimmune diseases." The NIH says that the 
prevalence IS increasing; it has recently been 
called "an epidemic" and an "explosion." Many 
researchers have listed from 80 to more than 1 00 
diseases that they consider to be "autoimmune." 
The idea of autoimmune disease can be traced 
back to Paul Ehrlich's theory of immunity, and his 
idea of a therapeutic "magic bullet" has dominated 
the medical approach to treating the autoimmune 
diseases. In the theory, the immune system's 
normal function is to destroy pathogens by a 
specific "lock and key" interaction, and errors in 
the system cause it to attack tissues of the "self" ' rather than "not-self' substances. In both cancer 
and autoimmunity, the dominant theory has been 
that particular genes are causative, with varying 
roles ascribed to environmental factors such as 
viruses, toxins, and mutagens. 
Treatments for rheumatoid arthritis have 
overlapped with treatments for cancer, usmg cytotoxic-immunosuppressive chemicals such as 
methotrexate, gold salts, and glucocorticoid 
hormones, or radiation, to destroy the cells that 
damage "self' tissues. Because of the brain 
damage and other effects of those treatments ' special antibodies have been developed to block 
the natural inflammation-promoting substances 
such as tumor necrosis factor and interferon, but 
treatment with these can cost $2000 per month, 
and they don't correct the basic problem. They are 
sold with the warning that they can increase 
susceptibility to deadly infections. 
The embryologist Elie Metchnikoff looked at 
immunity as an aspect of the organism's mainte­
nance of its own integrity. The role of phagocytes 
in shaping an organism, such as turning a tadpole 
into a frog, was guided by the identity of the 
whole organism, and the elimination of pathogens 
followed the same principle. Although the idea of 
a guiding organismic field that was held by most 
embryologists disappeared in the 1950s, in the 
1990s a similar holistic view appeared m 
Matzinger's "danger theory" and Cunliffe's 
"morphostasis" or damage theory of immunity, in 
which destruction of pathogens isn't "the 
purpose" of the "immune system," but a side 
effect of maintaining organismic integrity. 
From that perspective, "protective autoimmu­
nity" isn't a contradiction in terms, and the 
"diseases of autoimmunity" look very different. 
The ability of organisms to defend themselves 
against the infmite variety of alien substances 
puzzled geneticists for many years, until they 
decided that accelerated mutation in the immune 
cells could explain the ability to make an infmite 
number of magic bullet-, lock-and-key-, antibod­
ies. A requirement, in that point of view, was that 
these changes had to be random; there could be no 
intelligent behavior in the white blood cells ' something that had been implied in Metchnikoff' s 
phagocyte behavior. 
The "field" idea of the 20th century 
biologists-Alexander Gurwitsch, Charles Child, 
Paul Weiss, and others-was understood as the 
conditions that permitted the cells of the organism 
to achieve and maintain a functional unique 
identity. Gurwitsch explored the role ofweak light 
emissions from cells, Child saw metabolic gradi­
ents as the basis of the generation and maintenance 
of a unified form, with its polarities, and Weiss 
included the organism's relation to its environment 
as one of the components of the organismic field. 
Each organism in its development is constantly 
making decisions as it interacts with the world, 
and these decisions affect its structure, and consti­
tute its uniqueness. Individual cells coming into 
being in the organism experience the unique 
conditions of their unique place in the organismic 
field, and their reactions to their place in the field 
modify the field. The ways that they sense their 
surroundings and organize appropriate responses 
have been ignored and/or denied by reductionist 
biologists, but they are the focus of attention for 
those who are taking a new look at "immunity." 
When a cell is understood to be sensing and 
responding to its unique situation, it's appropriate 
to view it as making intelligent generalizations and 
making appropriate decisions. 
One of the important "sense organs" of cells 
(white blood cells, cells in mucous membranes, 
endothelial cells, even brain cells) is the "Toll-like 
receptor," TLR, which can cause cells to produce 
inflammatory cytokines, including interleukins, 
tumor necrosis factor TNF, and interferon. The 
TLRs have a central place in autoimmunity as well 
as immunity in the original sense, but they were 
discovered as the crucial factor in establishing the 
dorso-ventral, back-front, polarity in the develop­
ing fruit fly embryo. They translate position into 
cellular differentiation. The fact that they occur 
throughout the organism, even in nerve cells in the 
brain, rather than just in the "immune white blood 
cells," is consistent with Metchnikoff's view, in 
which "immunity" is a side effect of maintaining 
the coherence of the organism. 
The integrity of an organism depends on every­
thing being in its proper place, and when the 2 
integrity is disrupted, appropriate reactions occur, 
to restore the pattern. With small local distur­
bances of the field, the irritant will just be 
removed and degraded, with local adjustments of 
cell metabolism, but with larger disruptions, the 
entire organism will respond, with exchange of 
substance and information regionally and systemi­
cally, until the field becomes stable. 
Recent studies are showing that location can 
determine whether or not endogenous proteins 
provoke an inflammatory reaction. (Arneth, 2010, 
2012; Midgley and Beresford, 2011; Zheng, et al., 
2011). Traditionally, the pattern recognized 
immunologically was a molecular structure, such 
as a protein and a material bound to the protein, 
but now the meaningful patterns include complex 
situations, the position of substances within the 
organismic context. 
The traditional reductionist approach to 
immunology that has dominated for 100 years has 
given certain meanings to the components of what 
they call the immune system-antibodies, phago­
cytes, cytokines, etc. Biologists who are inter­
ested in the holistic processes of growth, develop­
ment, and regeneration have found different 
meanings in those things. For example, Polezhaev 
showed that phagocytosis is an integral part of the 
cell differentiation process in tissue regeneration. 
In the early embryo, where there are no pathogens, 
TNF and interferon are present, acting as regula­
tors of cell development and differentiation (Li, et 
al., 2014). Estrogen participates in the embryonic 
defmition of the dorso-ventral polarity (Carroll, et 
al., 2014). In the absence of pathogens, these 
"signals of inflammation" are morphogens, links 
in the organismic field. 
The toll-like receptor has been identified in 
simple animals such as flies, worms, and sponges, 
but estrogen is associated with even the simplest 
single cell organisms, such as Tetrahymena, so its 
functions in the organismic field are probably 
even more general than those of the TLR. 
When the organism is injured, the system's 
"morphogens" are called into action; if no foreign 
organism is responsible for the injury, the reaction 
is called "sterile inflammation." In a healthy 
young organism, the repairs are made to restore 
the field's integrity, and the "inflammatory" signals subside. However, ifthe organism lacks the 
necessary resources of substance and energy, the 
distortion of the field persists, potentially aggravat­
ing the deficiencies, leading to a state of chronic 
inflammation and degeneration. When there is no 
injury, the same signals guide the continuing 
processes of renewal. 
One basic question is "what does injury mean 
to the organism?" With a general answer to that 
question, we can think about the organism's possi­
ble restorative responses, as they relate to 
"immunity," as well as to "autoimmunity" and 
regeneration and aging. 
Highly organized multicellular organisms 
depend on the high metabolic efficiency made 
possible by the use of oxygen. During cell division 
to replace lost or damaged cells, this oxidative 
metabolism is suspended, and then is restored to 
allow the new cells to differentiate and take their 
place in the organismic field. The field, the organ­
ism's integrity, is sustained by organized respira­
tory metabolism, and it can be interrupted by 
mechanical trauma, excessive stimulation, poisons, 
etc., or by the absence of oxygen, of glucose, or of 
substances that specifically neutralize the inflam­
matory signals. All of these forms of injury 
activate aromatase, the enzyme that converts 
testosterone to estrogen, and estrogen activates the 
primitive processes that support cell division. 
If "injury" effectively means "hypoxia with 
activation of estrogenic processes," then we can 
see that, in outline, the healing recovery process 
will involve various means for restoring tissue 
oxidative metabolism. Seeing a local injury in the 
context of the organism's life as a whole, we can 
see it as a parallel to the rising formation of estro­
gen that prepares the egg and the uterus lining for 
pregnancy with local hypoxia, followed by a shift 
to progesterone production and a generously 
renewed supply of oxygen. The estrogen­
progesterone polarity of pregnancy exists in the 
adult tissues, as the polarity of growth and matura­
tion, of inflammation and normalization. 
Almost as soon as purified estrogen was avail­
able for research in the 1930s its ability to produce 
inflammation, cancer, miscarriages, and convul­
sions was recognized, but after 1941 the US 
pharmaceutical industry conspired to promote it as 3 
a cure for cancer and hundreds of other medical 
problems, including miscarriages and arthritis. 
Estrogen's essential role in the autoimmune 
inflammatory diseases has been apparent for 
several decades, but the industry's control of the 
FDA, the medical journals, and the universities 
has made people explain away their perceptions. 
Women whose rheumatoid arthritis began shortly 
after they started using estrogen often insisted on 
continuing it or even increasing the doses, because 
they and their doctors believed the claims in the 
medical journals. When they could be convinced 
to take a vacation from the estrogen treatment, 
their recovery was usually quick and complete. 
In the 1970s, after I had learned to think of 
progesterone as the antagonist of estrogen, rather 
than as merely its complement during gestation, I 
suggested that some people with swollen, red, 
painful stiff joints try applying some progesterone 
topically. The first woman who tried it was in 
menopause, and her ratio of estrogen to progester­
one was 1 to 1, many times higher than it should 
be. Her index fmger that had looked like a stiff 
red sausage became flexible, painless and normal 
a few days after dipping it into a solution of 
progesterone in olive oil. Over the next ten years I 
saw similar immediate, complete, and permanent 
recoveries in a series of people who had been 
diagnosed with either rheumatoid or "osteoarthri­
tis." At that time osteoarthritis was treated as a 
separate disease resulting from the wear and tear 
of aging, even though it was much more prevalent 
in women, and was associated with excessive 
estrogen. 
There are many reasons for an imbalance 
between estrogen and progesterone. With aging, 
the amount of aromatase in the ovaries increases 
(Shaw, et al., 2015), but the failure to form the 
progesterone-producing corpora lutea at 
menopause causes a sudden decrease in progester­
one, leaving a relative excess of estrogen. In rats, 
removal of the ovaries doesn't lower estrogen 
(Dimitrijevic, et al., 2013; Stanojevic, et al., 
2015), but it does lower progesterone. Ovaries are 
a minor part of the body's estrogen production, 
but a major part of its progesterone production. 
The adrenal glands, brain, and skin can produce 
progesterone, but the ovaries are specialized to produce large amounts of it, using the abundant 
cholesterol in the blood stream as its raw material. 
Injury to the ovaries, or systemic stress, tends to 
decrease the production of progesterone, while the 
body's production of estrogen is increased. 
Endotoxin absorbed from the intestine during 
stress promotes many inflammatory reactions, and 
activates aromatase (Christeff, et al., 1987, 1991, 
1992). 
It's hard to imagine how it would be possible 
for an "estrogen deficiency" to occur, but very 
easy to see why an excess of estrogen is so 
common. When the body's anabolic hormones, 
especially the thyroid hormone T3, are decreased, 
more events become stressful. Because of the 
inefficient use of glucose in hypothyroidism, fatty 
acids are mobilized from the tissues, and these 
contribute to stress and inflammation. In the 
autoimmune diseases, free fatty acids are consis­
tently high. Besides contributing to the energy 
deficiency of hypothyroidism, the free fatty acids 
promote the effects of estrogen, and increase the 
formation of the inflammatory prostaglandins, 
which activate aromatase. Since estrogen increases 
lipolysis and elevates free fatty acids, and 
promotes their conversion to prostaglandins, this 
process initiated by stress easily becomes a self­
sustaining vicious circle. 
These components, hypothyroidism, accumu­
lated polyunsaturated fatty acids, and unopposed 
estrogen, are basic components of all the autoim­
mune diseases. Progesterone happens to intervene 
at every stage of this process, tending to interrupt 
it. Sugar's ability to lower free fatty acids and to 
activate the thyroid hormone make it another 
important normalizing factor in stress and inflam­
mation. Niacinamide and aspirin, by reducing free 
fatty acids, prostaglandins, and nitric oxide, and 
increasing cell energy, are very helpful in correct­
ing the problems that lead to the "autoimmune 
diseases." 
Since the 1950s, it has been recognized that 
antibodies produced by B cells are central to the 
autoimmune process. With aging and stress, the 
regulatory thymus gland shrinks (from about 3 
5 
grams around puberty to about 5 grams at age 70), 
while the more stable B cells are maintained at 
about the same level, or even increased. Without a 4 
functioning thymus, the antibodies bound to 
antigenic material become a problem (for example 
activating mast cells and platelets), rather than 
being just part of a corrective process. 
Current therapies reduce inflammation by 
eliminating one or more components of the B cell 
antibody system. The reduced inflammation can 
permit some restorative processes to work, but the 
drugs aren't curative. A more biological approach 
would be to reduce exposure to the factors that 
damage the thymus or over-excite the B cells. 
Some of the factors that cause atrophy of the 
thymus gland include cortisol and other glucocor­
ticoid hormones, estrogen, prostaglandins, polyun­
saturated fatty acids, lipid peroxidation, nitric 
oxide, endotoxin, hypoglycemia, and ionizing 
radiation. Progesterone and thyroid hormone 
support restoration of the thymus gland, providing 
protection by opposing all of those agents of 
atrophy. An increase of sugar in the diet can 
correct some of the metabolic changes of aging 
(Missios, et al., 2014). Proliferating thymic cells 
are energized by sugar, their senescence is 
activated by fat metabolism. 
Drugs that are currently used with some 
success for treating diseases that aren't thought of 
as "autoimmune," such as memantine used in 
Alzheimer's disease, will probably be useful in the 
"autoimmune diseases," that is, in diseases that 
involve estrogen and inflammation, including 
cancer. 
REFERENCES 
Rev Bras Reumatol. 2014 
Nov-Dec;54(6):446-51. [Higher nitric oxide 
levels are associated with disease activity in 
Egyptian rheumatoid arthritis patients]. 
[Article in Portuguese] Ali AM, Habeeb RA, 
El-Azizi NO, K.hattab DA, Abo-Shady RA, 
Elkabarity RH. 
J Neuroimmunol. 2010 Feb 26;219(1-2):123-5. 
Protective autoimmunity and protein localiza­
tion. Ameth BM 
Med Hypotheses. 2012 Oct;79(4):519-21. 
Confirmation of the "protein-traffic-hypothesis" 
and the "protein-localization-hypothesis" using the 
diabetes-mellitus-type-1-knock-in and transgenic-murine-models and the trepitope 
sequences. Arneth B. 
Exp Gerontol. 2013 Nov;48(11):1243-54. The 
influence of aging and estradiol to progesterone 
ratio on rat macrophage phenotypic profile and 
NO and TNF -a production. Dimitrijevic M, 
Stanojevic s, Kustrimovic N, Mitic K, Vujic V, 
Aleksic I, Radojevic K, Leposavic G. 
Dev Cell. 2014 May 27;29(4):437-53. Estro­
gen defines the dorsal-ventral limit of VEGF 
regulation to specify the location of the 
hemogenic endothelial niche. Carroll KJ, Esain 
V, Gamaas MK, Cortes M, Dovey MC, Nissim S, 
Frechette GM, Liu SY, Kwan W, Cutting CC, 
Harris JM, Gorelick DA, Halpern ME, Lawson 
ND, Goessling W, North TE. 
J Steroid Biochem. 1987 Jan;26(1 ):67-71. 
Endotoxin-induced changes in sex steroid 
hormone levels in male rats. ChristeffN, Auclair 
MC, Benassayag C, Carli A, Nunez EA. Genes 
Dev. 2014 Dec 1;28(23):2597-612. 
Life Sci. 1991;48(24):2341-8. Endotoxin 
induced changes in serum estrogen in male rats: 
influence of testicular maturation. Christeff N, 
Auclair MC, Thobie N, Benassayag C, Nunez EA. 
Life Sci. 1992;50(19):1459-68. Effect of the 
aromatase inhibitor, 4 hydroxyandrostenedione, 
on the endotoxin-induced changes in steroid 
hormones in male rats. ChristeffN, Auclair MC, 
Dehennin L, Thobie N, Benassayag C, Carli A, 
Nunez EA. 
Genes Dev. 2014 Dec 1;28(23):2597-612. 
Inflammatory signaling regulates embryonic 
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell produc­
tion. Li Y, Esain V, Teng L, Xu J, Kwan W, Frost 
IM, Yzaguirre AD, Cai X, Cortes M, Maijenburg 
MW, Tober J, Dzierzak E, Orkin SH, Tan K, North 
TE, Speck NA. 
Lupus. 2011 May;20(6):641-6. Cellular local­
ization of nuclear antigen during neutrophil 5 
apoptosis: mechanism for autoantigen 
exposure? Midgley A, Beresford MW. 
Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 18;5:4924. Glucose 
substitution prolongs maintenance of energy 
homeostasis and lifespan of telomere dysfunc­
tional mice. Missios P, Zhou Y, Guachalla LM, 
von Figura G, Wegner A, Chakkarappan SR, Binz 
T, Gompf A, Hartleben G, Burkhalter MD, Wulff 
V, Glines C, Sattler RW, Song Z, Illig T, Klaus S, 
Bohm BO, Wenz T, Hiller K, Rudolph KL. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jun 
30:JC20152191. Compensatory Increase in 
Ovarian Aromatase in Older Regularly Cycling 
Women. Shaw ND, Srouji SS, Welt CK, Cox KH, 
Fox JH, Adams JA, Sluss PM, Hall JE. 
Am J Reprod Immunol. 2015 
Nov;74(5):445-56. Unopposed Estrogen 
Supplementation/Progesterone Deficiency in 
Post-Reproductive Age Affects the Secretory 
Profile of Resident Macrophages in a Tissue­
Specific Manner in the Rat. Stanojevic S, 
Kovacevic-Jovanovic V, Dimitrijevic M, Vujic V, 
Curuvija I, Blagojevic V, Leposavic G. 
Genes Immun. 2012 Dec;13(8):641-52. Meta­
analysis reveals an association of PTPN22 
C1858T with autoimmune diseases, which 
depends on the localization of the affected 
tissue. Zheng J, Ibrahim S, Petersen F, Yu X. 
J Neuroinflammation. 2014 Dec 16;11:171. 
Estrogen receptor alpha deficiency protects 
against development of cognitive impairment in 
murine lupus. Cunningham MA, Wirth JR, 
Freeman LR, Boger HA, Granholm AC, Gilkeson 
GS. 
Neurochem Res. 2015 Aug;40(8):1719-27. 
The Use of Agmatine Provides the New Insight 
in an Experimental Model of Multiple 
Sclerosis. Ninkovic M, Stevanovic I, Stojanovic I, 
Ljubisavljevic S, Basic J, Peric P. 
************************* 