Ray Peat's Newsletter
Not for republication without written permission. Copyright 1991 Raymond Peat P.O. Box 5764, Eugene, OR97405
Bioelectric Fields, Regenera-
tion, and the Lactic Acid Myth
Exercise physiologists, knowing that lactic
acid isproduced during intense exercise, and
cancer biologists (especially since Warburg's work
showing that all cancers have a respiratory defect)
who know that cancer tends to produce lactic
acid, almost always talk about the "acidity" of the
fatigued muscle or of the cancer cell.
While it is true that the entry of lactic acid
into the blood tends to produce metabolic
acidosis, the cell which is producing the lactic
acid is actually more alkaline than normal cells.
The simplest way to think of it is that "acid
leaving the muscle makes it less acidic." But still,
even though the chemical formula for producing
lactic acid directly shows the consumption of
acidity, and direct measurements confirm that the
What we call inflammation offers a good
conceptual link between the studies on excito-
toxicity orcellular stress, and. the newer
approaches to the treatment of aging and
diseases, based on ideas of regen-
eration and development. Controlling Inflam-
mation becomes part of promoting
regeneration. Injury potential and inflamma-
tion are closely related; for example, I found
that sunburned skin, or skin irritated by the
application of a prostaglandin, had a negative
polarity relative tonormal adjacent skin.
cells become more alkaline when they produce
lactate, the average biochemist or physiologist is
likely to think the opposite.
Lactic acid (or its ion, lactate) is involved in
stress, aging, edema, inflammation, rheumatic
diseases, bioelectricity, nerve-muscle interactions, cancer, and the antiinflammatory actions of the
thyroid hormone, among other things, so a funda-
mental confusion about what it does to cells
means that much of biological and medical
opinion has been unfounded. When I discussed
the cellular alkalinizing effect of lactic acid
formation in my dissertation in 1972, it wasn't a
matter of scientific dispute, and since then, the
newer techniques of measurement have made the
situation even clearer. But, even today, almost
always when conclusions are drawn about muscle
fatigue, cancer, radiation damage, etc., they are
based to a large extent on the false assumption
about lactic acid and cellular pH. A specialist too
often builds on the generalizations that a repropa-
gated by textbooks and other mass media.
When the pH of a cell or tissue changes, its
electrical properties change.
In the normal body, repair is going on
constantly, and generally the new substance
conforms to the existing pattern. The systems of
signals that govern these patterns are called
'developmental fields' and during the last 80
years, evidence has accumulated showing that
electrical fields participate in these processes of
organization. (Child, 1921; McCaig, 1996.)
There is an electrical field around organisms
and, internally, electrical fields contribute to the
development and/maintenance of anatomical
structure. Sharks are able to find small fish
buried under sand by detecting their electrical
fields; they will dig torelectrical devices that
have similar fields. Large electrical fields have
been demonstrated extending away from the
surface of skin, and since these fields have some
ofthe properties of a "static electrical field,"
many people have assumed that the charge was
just something that passively accumulated by
friction.
But an experimenter demonstrated the
presence of an electrical field extending outward
from the external surface of pieces of skin grown
in a culture dish. When cyanide was added to the
medium, blocking respiration, the field collapsed,
and when the cyanide was washed out of the skin,
allowing respiration to continue, the field
reappeared. The intensity of respiration clearly
governs the intensity of the field. The researcher
suggested that the field had the characteristics of
an "electret" field. An electret is a charge polari-
zation that results when the molecules of a
substance (wax or ceramic) are aligned by an
external field while at a relatively high tempera-
ture, and then cooled.
He implied that the energy of respiration was
causing an alignment of molecules, resulting in
the polarization of charges. Any field of this sort
will influence other charged particles, and so it is
obvious that it will participate in the arrangement
and organization of particles. The existence of
such fields probably influences the alignments of
particles within cells, and of cells within organs.
There is a tremendous difference in the strength
of the field produced by different individuals, but
the pattern is always essentially the same, except
when it is distorted by pathological conditions;
tumors, for example, distort the field.
In general, cell or stimulation
increases the intensity of cellular respiration, but
when oxygen isn't available, the stressed or dying
cell may become hyperactive. Epileptic seizures,
for example, can be produced by hypoxia or
hypoglycemia, as well as by other stimuli such as
imbalances of salts and water.
Textbooks often represent cellular electricity
with a diagram showing the outside of a cell as
"positive" relative to the "negative" inside of the
cell. And researchers who have read those
textbooks uncritically sometimes speak of the
"positive" charge or field outside a cell. I'm sure
they won't feel humiliated if I point out that the
whole thing is an artifact of their experimental
setup. Isolated cells in a liquid will move toward
the positive pole in an electrical field, showing
that the cell outwardly has a negative charge.
This is called the sigma potential, or surface
potential. And if thecell is pulverized, again,
nearly all of its large molecular componenents
and organelles will move toward the positive
pole.
When anelectrode is poked into a cell, it
registers a negative polarity relative to the neutral
outside. On a larger scale, if you put one
electrode on moist skin, and put another electrode
on a cut, the cut skin will be negative relative to
the intact skin. This is called an "injury
potential." But the intact skin is itself negatively
charged, in the same way that any whole cell is
negatively charged.
It has been suggested that sharks are attracted
to wounded animals by the electrical field caused
by the injury, rather than by the odor of the blood,
since they can detect the injured animal from
distances far beyond the spread of chemical
substances from theblood. The animal's "injury
potential"s apparently just an intensification of
the animal's normal electrical field. (Although
much of the research onelectrical sensing has
been done on fish, I suspect that land animals
sometimes use electrical sensing. For example,
dogs can sense an impending epileptic seizure of
their owner; the electrical fields created--by the
brain or the skin--during an extreme metabolic
disturbance might be larger than those of a small
fish buried under sand. People are able to detect
the flow of a weak current in a buried wire, as
discussed by Barnothy and Barnothy in
Biomagnetics.)
I have seen articles in major science journals
that draw important conclusions from the nonex-
istent positive charge supposed to be on the
outside of cells, and those things have got past the
editors and referees because those ideas are so
current in our scientific culture. Less blatant, but
equally false, ideas are even more prevalent. The
use of various microelectrode techniques has
produced an abundance of information on cellular
electrical responses, but with the exception of the
work of Gilbert Ling and a few others, the
meaning of the data is obscured by a huge culture
of phantasy theories.
With this sort of fundamental confusion about
bioelectricity, it isn't surprising that there is so
little interest in the morphogenetic influences of
electrical fields. The textbook images of
"membrane potential" give the impression either
that relevant fields don't exist, or that they are the
opposite of those observed experimentally, and
those mistaken textbook images overwhelmingly
dominate the scientific-political-economic scene.
The overall charge on proteins and other
macrolecules is, in general, a matter of the pH of
their environment. Usually, cellular proteins have
a negative charge above a pH of 5. The ionization
of chemical groups such as hydroxyl, amino, and
sulfhydryl are responsible for the overall charge.
The degree of oxidation or reduction affects the
number of sulfhydryl groups, and the structural
state of the protein also influences the charge. At
high pH the charge is high, and the number and
arrangement of sulfhydryl groups can affect the
charge. The presence of small ions, carbon
dioxide, andoxygen also influence the charge of
proteins. When the whole living system is
involved, bioelectricity interacts with other
electron-related phenomena, including oxidation-
reduction., pH, donor-acceptor and free radical
reactions.
When the pH of blood is high, the cells of
blood vessels are excited into contraction. When
the pH of the blood is low, nerve activity can be
dulled to the point of coma, as in diabetic
acidosis. I think these effects of pH, and the
simpler effects of pH on protein charge, are
closely related to each other, and to the phenome-
non of the injury potential.
Since proteins are generally negatively
charged, and tend to move toward the positive
pole when they are in an electrical field, a
membrane made up of proteins (sheets or layers
of cells, for example) will move in the same
direction relative to the water that permeates it,
meaning that the water will move in the opposite
direction, i.e., toward the negative pole. This is
called electroosmosis. Since the electrical charge
on proteins becomes more strongly negative when
the pH is high, and less strongly negative when
the pH is low, water will tend to move across
membranes from acidic regions into alkaline
regions. The contracting muscle tends to take up
water, and forcing it to take up water increases its
tendency to contract.
Oxygen, producing carbon dioxide, acidifies
the cell, and carbon dioxide influences the cell's
handling of water. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
are commonly used to regulate conditions involv-
ing edema, including adaptation to high altitudes.
During intense contraction, especially when
oxygen and carbon dioxide are limited, muscles
produce lactic acid, and the specific reaction in
which lactic acid is formed causes protons to be
consumed, that is, it raises the pH.
Increased pH, decreased osmolarity, and
the associated movements of ions increase the
cell's excitability.
Because of the long history of thinking of
muscle fatigue and hypoxia in terms of lactic acid
production, and the mistaken idea that intracellu-
lar pH is more acidic in proportion to the produc-
tion of lactic acid, the confusion of bioelectrical
ideas has been compounded by the confusion
about pH.
Cellular excitation, exhaustion, and injury
will affect the cell's electrical fields in different
ways depending on the availability of oxygen,
glucose, salts, etc., but in each of states,
there is increased entry of calcium into the
cytoplasm.
Calcium's entry into cells in itself can lead to
increased excitation (muscle contraction, cramps,
and seizures, for example), to cell death, or to
increased proliferation. (It has also been thought
that sodium and water can stimulate prolifera-
tion. For example, Berman, et al., 1995.)
Something as simple as reducing the pH can
prevent apoptotic ("organized" or "programmed")
cell death. (K.P. Hanson and V.E. Komar,
Molecular Mechanisms of the Radiation Death of
Cells, Energoatomizdat, Moscow, 1985).
Carbon dioxide, produced by respiration, and
ATP hydrolysis, are two powerful acidifiers of the
cell; with sufficient stimulation both can probably
act simultaneously, and in this situation the pH
decrease will tend to oppose the exciting
stimulus. Without sufficient oxygen to make
CO2, a given stimulus might cause excita-
tion and probability of death. The insufficiency
of oxygen also leads to a relatively reduced state
of the cytoplasmic proteins, increasing their
electrical charge at a given pH. CO2 has many
other effects that act in the same protective
direction, such as calcium removal, iron
binding, and water binding, and these other
effects are at least as important as the pH effect.
(Badylak and Babbs, 1986 showed that the combi-
nation of a calcium blocker and an iron chelator
with carbon dioxide tripled the survival after 7
minutes of cardiac arrest.) Adequate CO2 is
intimately involved in the disposition of calcium,
and calcium's regulatory significance is univer-
sally recognized.
K.P. Buteiko believed that increased carbon
dioxide in the body fluids sometimes caused
cancers to disappear. In many studies over the
last 40 years (and the trend can also be seen in
insurance statistics published in 1912), it is clear
that cancer mortality is much lower at high
altitude. Under all conditions studied, the charac-
teristic lactic acid metabolism of stress and cancer
is suppressed at high altitude, as respiration is
made more efficient. The Haldane effect shows
that carbon dioxide retention is increased at high
altitude.
Studying athletes at sea level and at high
altitude, it was seen that less lactic acid is
produced by maximal exercise at high altitude
than at sea level. Since oxygen deficiency in
itself tends to cause the formation of lactic acid,
this has been called the "lactate paradox"; the
expectation was that more lactic acid would be
formed, yet less was produced. Something was
turning off the production of lactic acid.
Normally, it is oxidative respiration that turns off
glycolysis and lactic acid production, so that in
exercise beyond the ability of the body to deliver
oxygen, and in cancer with its respiratory defect,
glycolysis produces lactic acid. So, something is
happening at high altitude which turns off
glycolysis.
The Haldane effect is a term for the fact
that hemoglobin gives up oxygen in the presence
of carbon dioxide, and releases carbon dioxide in
the presence of oxygen. It is the increased reten-
tion of carbon dioxide that accounts for the
"lactate paradox." Carbon dioxide activates the
Krebs cycle, but it also combines with
ammonium, and in doing so, deactivates glycoly-
sis because ammonium activates a regulatory
enzyme. At high elevation, carbon dioxide is
retained, and lactic acid formation is suppressed.
(This is called the Pasteur effect, but altitude
physiologists haven't begun thinking in these
directions.) Comparing very low altitude (Jordan
valley, over 1000 feet below sea level) with
moderate altitude (620 meters above sea level),
ACTH was increased in runners after a race only
at the low altitude, indicating that the stress
reaction was prevented by a moderate increase
of altitude. (el-Migdadi, et al., 1996.)
The perspective we get on cancer, from the
high altitude studies, allows us to go beyond the
specific issue of cancer, to the more general issue
of stress and regeneration. In outline, stress alters
the physical nature of the cellular substance in a
way that activates the cell, in which case it will
either die from exhaustion, or grow into new
cells. The replacement of injured cells means
that mutations need not accumulate, and this
renewal with elimination of mutant cells has been
observed in sun-damaged skin. Among the many
layers of form-generating and form-sustaining
systems, the balance of electrical fields has a
basic place.
Several investigators have demonstrated that
internal cancers altered the external electrical
polarity of the animal, increasing the negative
polarity in a region near the tumor. In the late
1960s, I suspected that irritation or inflammation
created an injury potential, similar to the "demar-
cation potential" of an acute nerve or muscle. I
covered one arm so that a small spot would
sunburn without exposing the surrounding skin,
and in other spots I applied small amounts of
prostaglandins, the "hormones" derived from
unsaturated fatty acids. The sunburned area was
distinctly negative relative to adjacent areas, and
some of the prostaglandins (pGF, for example)
produced a slight increase of negative charge. I
think these changes reflect both intensified
metabolism and increased pH caused by inter-
fering with efficient cell metabolism. Lactic acid
production raises the pH, and high pH increases
the ionization of most proteins.
The localized distortion of the electrical fields
will participate in adjustments that should tend to
restore the normal fields, with different processes
occurring depending on how long the distortion
continues. Ordinarily, the fields change in
concerted ways during the rhythmic events of
eating, excreting, breathing, and sleeping.
When a state of excitement persists long
enough for the cell to produce an excess of lactic
acid, causing it to become more strongly charged
electrically, nearby blood vessels and nerves will
tend to grow into the area, restoring normal
energy supply and integrated functioning. (Lactic
acid can be demonstrated to stimulate vascular
growth by putting it near the eye's cornea, causing
blood vessels to invade previously clear areas. In
cell culture, McCaig demonstrated that nerve cells
grow toward the negative electrode.)
When a cell has been damaged (as by radia-
tion or toxins), its inefficiency creates a small
localized distortion in the fields, which will
stimulate processes of repair or removal and
replacement, as far as the organism's resources
allow. When a stress is great enough that the
entire organism is exposed to lactic acid, the
organism's adaptive resources are being
challenged, and potentially harmful responses are
evoked. For example, a sluggish liver can allow
the blood lactate concentration to rise during
stress, and this can lead to secretion of endorphins
and pituitary hormones (Elias, et al., 1997). The
endorphins can increase histamine release, and
growth hormone increases free fatty acids;
increased permeability of blood vessels can allow
proteins and fats to leave the blood stream with
cumulatively harmful effects.
In general, the factors that protect against
harmful local activation of cells are also protec-
tive against maladaptive general responses.
The doctrines that explain aging, cancer, and
other diseases in terms of the "wearing out of
cells" have been based on the denial of the role of
organismic patterns and fields in the regulation of
events on the cellular and molecular levels.
Those theories or doctrines have been popular
because they fit the "reductionist" idea of science,
which tries to explain the organism as a whole in
terms of its smallest parts. The investigation of
regeneration, which requires thinking in terms of
patterns and fields, has been retarded by that
essentially antibiological culture of reductionism.
Sodium and carbon dioxide are essential for
maintaining the normal fields, and these
substances interact in ways that cause both of
them to be lost during stress. In hypothyroidism,
sodium is persistently lost, as carbon dioxide is
chronically replaced by lactic acid.
Both sodium (Veech, et al.; Garrahan and
Glynn) and carbon dioxide—by stimulating the
Krebs cycle, and keeping the respiratory enzymes
active—help to maintain the normal level of ATP,
protecting against stress and shock.
The interlocking fundamental features of cell
excitation/relaxation, electrical potential, lactic
acid/carbon dioxide, water retention/water loss,
salt regulation, pH, and energy level, allow us to
visualize in a coherent way the biological
meaning of stress and adaptation. Interacting
with those physical-chemical events, there are
many layers of biochemical and physiological
processes that reinforce or modify them, includ-
ing regulatory systems such as hormones and
other biological signaling substances, nutritional
adequacy, and the type of fuel used. The safest
and most effective interventions will be those
which support our basic organizational fields
(sodium, carbon dioxide, balanced proteins,
fruits, thyroid, pregnenolone, for example), and
don't introduce distortions, as some drugs, foods,
hormones, and supplements do.
REFERENCES
Elias AN; Wilson AF; Naqvi S; Pandian MR,
"Effects of blood pH and blood lactate on growth
hormone, prolactin, and gonadotropin release after
acute exercise in male volunteers," Proc Soc Exp Biol
Med 214(2), 156-60, 1997. "It has recently been found
that prevention of the acidosis of anaerobic exercise
blocks beta-endorphin release. Because heavy exercise
affects secretion of other anterior pituitary hormones,
we studied the results of alkali infusion and ingestion
upon blood levels of four hormones: luteinizing5
hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH),
growth hormone (GH), and prolactin (PRL)." "GH and
PRL but not FSH or LH increased significantly
postexercise ...."
K.R. Robinson and M. A. Messerli, "Electric
embryos: the embryonic epithelium as a generator of
developmental information," Ch. 9, 131-145, Nerve
Growth and Guidance, C.D. McCaig, editor, Ashgate
Publ. Co., 1996. .
C.D. McCaig, Nerve Growth and Guidance,
Ashgate Publ. Co., 1996. "DC fields alone profoundly
influence nerve growth and guidance and do so by
impinging on specific receptors and by activating well
recognized second messenger systems."
C.M. Child, The Origin and Development of the
Nervous System, Univ. of Chicago Press, 1921.
S.R. Dager, et al., "Proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy investigation of hyperventilation in
subjects with panic disorder and comparison subjects,"
Am. J. Psychiatry 152(5), 666-672, 1995. "Panic disor-
der subjects exhibited significantly greater rises in
brain lactate than comparison subjects in response to
the same level of hyperventilation." "This increase in
brain lactate may result from decreased cerebral blood
flow due to hypocapnia ...."
D.T. George, et al., "Effect of chloride or glucose
on the incidence of lactate-induced panic attacks," Am.
J. Psychiatry 152(5), 692-697, 1995. "The coadminis-
tration of glucose resulted in a reduced sensitivity to
the panicogenic effects of lactate. "
G.B. Haycock, "The influence of sodium on
growth in infancy," Pediatr. Nephrol. 7(6), 871-875,
1993. "Early nutrition in preterm infants can affect
subsequent growth and also cognitive function: This is
probably multifactorial, but NaCl intake differed
substantially between study groups and is likely to be
an important factor. The mechanism whereby Na
promotes cell growth is not understood ...."
F. Berman, et al., "An early transient increase of
intracellular Na+ may be one of the first components
of the mitogenic signal. Direct detection by 23Na-
NMR spectroscopy in quiescent 3T3 mouse fibroblasts
stimulated by growth factors," Biochim Biophys Acta
1239(2), 177-185, 1995.
R.L. Veech, G.A. Cook, and M.T. King, "Relation-
ship of free cytoplasmic pyrophosphate to liver glucose
content and total pyrophosphate to cytoplasmic
phosphorylation potential," FEBS Lett 117, K65-72,
1980.
Garrahan, PJ and Thof Glyrm, "The incorporation of
inorganic phosphate into adenosine triphosphate by
reversal of the sodium pump," J. Physiol 192,
237-256, 1967. S.F. Badylak and C.F. Babbs, "The effect of
carbon dioxide, lidoflazine and deferoxamine upon
long term survival following cardiorespiratory arrest in
rats," Resuscitation 13(1), 165-173, 1986. Seven
minutes after cardiac arrest, cardiopulmonary resusci-
tation was begun. "Treated rats were ventilated for 1
hour with 7% carbon dioxide-93% oxygen and given
lidoflazine ... and deferoxamine ... 5 min. after CPR."
".. control rats were ventilated for 1 hour with 100%
oxygen ...." "At 2 days ... 75% of treated rats vs. 25%
of control rats were alive."
F. Plum, et al., "Effect of hyperbaric-hyperoxic
hyperventilation on blood, brain, and CSF lactate,"
Am. J. Physiol. 215(5), 1240-1244, 1968.
F. el-Migdadi, et al., "Exercise at low altitude
(Jordan Valley) causes changes in serum levels of
ACTH, insulin, cortisol, and lactate," Endocr. Res.
763-767, 1996.
"Limiting factors for exercise at extreme
altitudes," West J. Clin Physiol, 1990 May, 10:3,
265-72. "Although ventilation is greatly increased,
it is a paradox that cardiac output for a given work
level is the same in acclimatized subjects at high
altitude as at sea level. Stroke volume is reduced but
not because of impaired myocardial contractility
because this is preserved' up to extreme altitudes.
Indeed the normal myocardium is one of the few
tissues whose function is unimpaired by the very
severe hypoxia." "In spite of the greatly reduced
aerobic capacity, anaerobiosis is greatly curtailed,
and it is predicted that above 7500 m, there is no
rise in blood lactate on exercise."
Stubbs M; Veech RL; Griffiths JR, "Tumor
metabolism: the lessons of magnetic resonance
spectroscopy," Adv Enzyme Regul 35, 101-15,1995.
For many years after Warburg's classic work, it was
generally assumed that tumors produced large amounts
of lactic acid and consequently had an acidic intracel-
lular pHi. However, with the advent of Magnetic
Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS), a non-invasive in
vivo measure of tissue pH became available and
demonstrated that· in both human and animal
tumors, pHi was higher (>7.0) than pHepsilon «
6.8), in contrast to normal tissues (e.g., liver) in
which pHi (approximately 7.2) is lower than pH
epsilon (approximately 7.4). This result has been
confirmed in animal tumors using an MRS-visible
extracellular marker, 3-aminopropyl phosphonate. The
pH gradient across the tumor cell membrane is part of
an interrelated system of ionic gradients and measure-
ments made by both 31P MRS and by conventional
analysis in

 Morris hepatoma 9618a and in livers
demonstrated that the following ions also·' changed:
compared with liver the Na+ content was 2-fold higher,
K+ was 20% lower, total Ca2+ was 8-fold higher (7.4
mumoVg wet wt) and total Pi2-fold higher (8.5
mumoVg wet wt), suggesting the presence of insoluble
calcium phosphate, HCO3- was lower, total Mg2+
was similar in both tissues, but free [Mg2+] (calcu-
lated by two different methods) was approximately
5-fold lower in the hepatoma, as was
[ATP]/[ADP) [P(i)]. Because of an inadequate blood
supply, tumors are often hypoxic with impaired
Krebs cycle activity, low [ATP]/[ADP) [P(i)) and
rely mainly' on glycolysis for energy. The rapid
production and subsequent export of anionic
lactate-from the tumor cell would be accompanied
by H+. This would account for reversal of the proton
gradient and activation of the Na+/H+ exchange. The
elevated [Na+]i would decrease the Na+/Ca2+
exchange, which would in turn tend to cause the
accumulation of Ca2+ (and P(i)). Such calcification is
a very common feature of tumor pathology. The data
indicate the change in gradient of one ion (H+)
involves alterations in the linked equilibria of many
ions and also of energy metabolites and offers new
insights into properties of tumors important both
diagnostically and therapeutically.
Kayser B; Ferretti G; Grassi B; Binzoni T; Cerre-
telli P, "Maximal lactic capacity at altitude: effect of
bicarbonate loading," J Appl Physiol 75(3), 1070-4,
1993.
Kayser B, "Lactate during exercise at high
altitude," Eur J Appl Physiol 74(3), 195-205, 1996. "In
acclimatized humans at high altitude the reduction,
compared to acute hypoxia, of the blood lactate
concentration (la) at any absolute oxygen uptake
(V02), as well. as the reduction of maximum la
(Iamax) after exhaustive exercise, compared to both
acute hypoxia or normoxia, have been considered
paradoxical, and these phenomena have therefore
become known as the 'lactate paradox'." "At present, it
appears that the acclimatization-induced changes in
[1a-] during exercise are the result of at least two
mechanisms: (1) a decrease in maximum substrate flux
through aerobic glycolysis due to the reduced
V02max in hypoxia; and (2) alterations in the
metabolic control of glycogenolysis and glycolysis at
the cellular level, largely because of the changes in
adrenergic drive of glycogenolysis that ensue during
acclimatization, although effects of changes in periph-
eral oxygen transfer and the cellular redox state cannot
be ruled out. With regard to the differences in lactate
accumulation during exercise that have been reported
to occur between lowlanders and highlanders, both
groups either being acclimatized or not, these do not seem to be based upon fundamentally different
metabolic features. Instead, they seem merely to reflect
points along the same continuum of phenotypic
adaptation of which the location depends on the time
spent at high altitude.
Buteyko, K.P., "The theory of C02-deficient
diseases of civilisation as an adaptation to the
evolution of atmosphere," Kiberneticheskie
Aspekty Adaptatsii Sistemy "Chelovek-Sreda,"
Tez. Seminara, Moscow, 1975. seminar thesis.
Stubbs M; Rodrigues L; Howe FA; Wang J; Jeong
KS; Veech RL; Griffiths JR.,"Metabolic consequences
of a reversed pH gradient in rat tumors," Cancer Res
5-1(15), -1011--1016, 1994. "We have previously
demonstrated (M. Stubbs, Z.M.Bhujwalla, G.M.
Tozer, L.M.Rodrigues, R.J.Maxwell, R.Morgan, F.
A.Howe, and J.R.Griffiths, NMR Biomed.5, 351,
1992) that the intracellular pH (pHi) of several rat
tumors is higher (>pH7.0) than that of the tumor
extracellular fluid (pHe), in contrast to normal tissues
(e.g., liver) in which pHi is lower than pHe. In this
paper we confirm a pHe of 6.8+/-0.07 (SEM) in
Morris hepatoma 9618a by an independent method
and report the tissue content of other ions by both 31P
magnetic resonance spectroscopy and by conventional
analysis in hepatomas and livers in rats. Compared
with liver, tissue Na+ was 2-fold higher and tissue K+
was lower. Tissue Ca2+ was 8-fold higher (7.4 +/-4.3
mumoJ/g wet weight) and tissue Pi was 2-fold higher
(8.5 +/- 1.3 mumoV/g wet weight) suggesting the
presence of insoluble calcium phosphate. O- was
unchanged (approximately 40 mumoV/g wet weight),
whereas HC03- was lower in the hepatoma (12.4 +/-
0.83 compared to 15.5 +/-0.76 mumoV/g wet weight).
Total tissue Mg2+ was similar in both tissues, but free
[Mg2+] (calculated by two different methods) was
approximately 5-fold lower in the hepatoma. The ATP
values were 3.5-fold and [NAD]/[NADH] 9-fold lower
in the hepatoma. The results are compatible with the
hypothesis that the chronic partial hypoxia of tumor
tissue involves changes in the linked equilibria of
many ions and metabolites and may help explain such
pathologies as calcification."
EIjefaIt I; Persson CG, "Inflammatory passage of
plasma macromolecules into airway wall and lumen,"
Pulm Pharmacol 2(2), 93-102, 1989. "Anaesthetized
guinea-pigs received tracer macromolecules 70-340
kDa intravenously and their erythrocytes were labelled
invivo with 99mTc." "It is suggested that the consis-
tent inflammatory stimulus-induced passage of plasma
into the lumen is a consequence of a load on the basal
side of the epithelium induced by the extravasated
plasma and its derived peptides. An increased
interstitial pressure may transiently separate many
epithelial cells allowing a mainly uni-directional almost
unrestricted flow of large solutes into the lumen."
H.Haber and L.R. Bach, "Normalization of blood
carbon dioxide levels by transition from conventional
ventilatory support to noninvasive inspiratory aids,"
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabif. 75(10), 1145-50, 1994.
"Chronic hypocapnia decreases ventilator-free breath-
ing time ... and may be associated with increased bone
resorption."
M.V.Riley, et al.,"The roles of bicarbonate and
C02 in transendothelial fluid movement and control of
corneal thickness," Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 36(1),
103-112, 1995.
Wheeler LA; Sachs G; DeVries G; Goodrum D;
Woldernussie E; MualJem S,"Manoalide, a natural
sesterterpenoid that inhibits calcium channels," J Biol
Chem 262(17), 6531-8. "Manoalide is a marine natural
product that has anti-inflammatory and anti-
proliferative activities and is an irreversible inhibitor of
phospholipase A2 and phospholipase C. It is now
shown that the compound is a potent inhibitor of Ca2+
mobilization in several cell types." "In addition,
manoalide also inhibited the Ca2+ influx induced by
concanavalin A in mouse spleen cells in a time- and
temperature-sensitive manner with an IC50 of 0.07
MicroM. However, neither forskolin-activated adeny-
late c-jchisc in A431 cells nor the distribution of the
potential sensitive dye, 3,3'-dipropylthio-
dicarbocyanide iodide in GH3 cells was affected by
manoalide. Thus, manoalide acts as a Ca2+ channel
inhibitor in all cells examined. This action may account
for its effects on inflammation and proliferation and
may be independent of its effect on phospholipases."
B. et al.,"Maximal rate of blood lactate
accumulation during exercise at altitude in humans," J.
Appl. Physiol. 79(1), 331-339, 1995. [Blood lactate
accumulation was greater at sea level after an exhaus-
tive load.]
A.Szydlowski and I. "Preservation
of the blood of slaughter animals ...;1. Metabolism of
the erythrocytes," Pol. Arch WeIer. 25(2-3), 177-187,
1987. "Decreased hemolysis during storage of blood
saturated with C02 resulted from significant changes
in metabolism of erythrocytes expressed by decreased
glycolysis rate.... and by increasing affinity of hemoglo-
bin for oxygen."
Notes:
[The living cell is different from most other electri-
cally polarized materials in being able to adjust its
charge, its affinity for small molecules and ions, and its
shape. During stimulation (and contraction of a
muscle), the phase potential may momentarily disap-
pear as proteins' affinity for potassium, sodium, and
calcium change, but the sigma potential doesn't, and
may even increase slightly. The nature of LC excited
state is different in different environments, for
example, at high altitude or in the presence of
increased carbon dioxide, muscles don't contract as
fully, and don't produce as much lactic acid during
their maximal activity, as they do under conditions of
high oxygen and low carbon dioxide pressure.)
[Increased carbon dioxide lowers the so-called
membrane potential (Ling and Gerard, 1949), which I
interpret as being almost equivalent to a lowering of
the "injury potential." There are several more direct
indications that carbon dioxide protects against
destructive excitation. Muscle contraction is limited
by increased carbon dioxide, and at high altitude,
maximum exertion is limited, very probably because
of the Haldane effect, in which carbon dioxide is
retained in proportion to the oxygen deficit.
Carbon dioxide increases the association of water
with proteins, a process analogous to lowering the
temperature; both cold and high CO2 concentrations
have a similar effect on muscle relaxation after
contraction. (Howell, 1920)
A deficiency of carbon dioxide (as in hyperventila-
tion) tends to cause epileptic seizures and muscle
cramps, and is a factor in asthma and several other
diseases (Buteiko) which seem to involve excessive
cellular excitation. I think it acts by way of reducing
the overall electrical charge of proteins, probably
acting as a "cardinal adsorbant," in Gilbert Ling's
sense-a molecule which, when bound to a protein,
changes the protein's affinity for other molecules.}
[When a needle is poked into a cell, it obviously
injures the cell, but the doctrine of the "plasma
membrane" leads people to deny that what they are
measuring is a type of "injury potential." They want to
say that they are measuring a disequilibrium between
the inside of the cell and the outside. (A disequilib-
rium has to be maintained by some charging mecha-
nism such as a "pump.") They talk about the
significance of the "membrane potential" as if the
presence of the electrode hardly had an effect on the
cell. And the surface (or sigma) potential always
seems to be forgotten by these people, who think of
the outside of the cell as "positive.")]
