 
Ry Peat's Newsletter
 Copyright 2004 Raymond Peat   P.O. Box 5764, Eugene, OR 97405 January 2005 Not for republication without written permission. 
THE ORIGINAL ARGUMENT:
 Cancer is the result of ordinary physiological processes which become autonomous because of regulatory weaknesses in the organism. Respiration is essential for the maintenance of the higher forms of life, and it is a respiratory defect, on both the cellular and the organismic levels, which allows cancer to persist and develop. The heme group, because it serves many respiratory functions-hemoglobin, mitochondrial respiratory enzymes, steroid synthesizing enzymes, formation of thyroid hormone, detoxifying enzymes--is regulated in relatively primitive ways within each cell, and in more complex ways at higher organismic levels. When the cell needs more respiratory energy, some fuel is diverted into the production of porphyrin, which is then turned into heme, which would normally provide for the efficient production of energy and protective factors. When the efficient energy-producing systems are blocked, by injury, oxygen deficiency, toxins, or by the lack of one or more essential nutritional factors, heme production is activated. Excess heme is destroyed by the enzyme heme oxygenase, which converts heme into biliverdin and carbon monoxide. Both of these factors have effects on the cell which are characteristic of cancer. Estrogen, radiation, chemical carcinogens, and other forms of stress, activate the heme oxygenase enzyme. Estrogen causes both porphyria and jaundice and is associated with increased formation of carbon monoxide. It inhibits many types of liver function, including detoxification. The production of carbon monoxide by cancer cells can account for cancer's self-sustaining, "hereditary," property, without invoking genetic mutations which are now known to be consequences, rather than causes of cancer. The production of carbon monoxide and biliverdin can account for many of the structural and biochemical abnormalities of cancer cells, and for their induction of abnormalities in adjacent cells. "Genetic" theories of cancer have now reached a dead end, and the epigenetic, developmentalphysiological approach remains as the only plausible description of cancer. 
Carbon monoxide, estrogen, and the medical cancer cult
 Previously when I wrote about the role of endogenously formed carbon monoxide in cancer, I probably didn't say enough about the way the idea fits into our cultural context. If an idea is very different from the existing cultural matrix, it's probably useful to consider it in its historical setting, and to contrast its theoretic models and implications with conventional models and practices, besides looking at some of the evidence that could confirm it. During Otto Warburg's lifetime, many people working on the cancer problem were sufficiently aware of his work (because of his Nobel prize) that they occasionally mentioned it dismissively. Now, very few people even know about his cancer research and his conclusion that the prime cause : of cancer is a cellular respiratory defect. For about 30 years, the dunces were in confederacy against him, then they forgot what it was about his work that had bothered them. Dean Burk, who was head of the cell biochemistry laboratory at the NIH for many years, was the only well known American who defended Warburg's interpretation of cancer, and now that they both have died, cancer researchers just don't feel the need to mention Warburg's work at all. In practice, science isn't a matter of a rational evaluation of evidence, but rather it's a matter of power, funding, and propaganda. In our culture, the understanding of cancer has been guided since the late 1940s by the propaganda of the American Cancer Society, supported by the corporate cancer industry and, especially since Nixon's War on Cancer began in 1971, by government funding. Warburg's work showed that anything which causes tissue atrophy contributes to the development of cancer, and that interference with the  cells' ability to use oxygen for energy production was the essential factor in cancer. Warburg was exploring this simple deterministic biochemical, physiological and developmental process in Germany just as quantum mechanics was destroying classical physics and Nazism was enforcing the dogma of genetic determinism and eugenics. The revision of Darwinism taking place at this time turned the doctrines of random mutation of genes and selection of "superior genes" into the essential core of biology and medicine. The same concepts were used to describe socially undesirable people (people whose genes had "degenerated") and the biologically undesirable cells of cancer. There were reasons for commerce and government to favor a theory of cancer in which a mysteriously random process turned a normal cell into a deadly alien cell that multiplied wildly and invaded and destroyed surrounding healthy tissues. One reason was that causes of cancer, such as soot, radiation, and estrogen, would become very unpopular if the public recognized the causal pathways between them and cancer, and polluters could be sued or accused of murder, and drug companies would lose the chance to market all of their infinitely profitable estrogens. And the idea of a mysteriously mutated cancer cell ruled out the idea of any therapy that would cause the cancer to regress or disappear in a physiological manner that didn't harm any other part of the body. The already established treatments of surgical removal, destruction by radiation, or destruction by cytotoxic chemicals were justified by the doctrine that the tumor, the clone of cells produced from the mutant cell, was irreversibly committed to its condition. The scientific foundation for that view of cancer has really been destroyed over the last fifty years, but it is rare to encounter a physician or professor of medicine who is aware of that. Even the majority of biology professors haven't realized the decisive nature of the evidence against it, because most of them don't read outside their own specialty. Oncology (which should mean the study of tumors) is really a medical religion, filled with rituals and incantation-like use of language. Despite the abundant evidence that access to medical diagnosis and treatment doesn't improve health, most people are mysteriously bound to the "health care system." Hotels don't have 13th floors, many people don't like it when a black cat crosses their path, or they knock on wood at odd moments in a conversation, even though they aren't superstitious. The culture influences behavior, just by being there. When your friends recite their version of the medical incantations, and your doctor repeats them while wearing a white jacket and expensive shoes, it seems only decent to go along with the system. Even if patients would like to question their doctors' assumptions, they can't do it successfully within the medical culture, and few people are willing to take a hostile stance toward a system that monopolizes many useful drugs. The mutant cell/clonal theory of cancer reduces the issue to a matter of choosing the best way to kill the patient's tumor without killing the patient. Very slowly, the practice of using a single modality against each type of tumor is being replaced by trials using several substances at the same time, or sequentially, and oncologists now sometimes magnanimously allow their patients to take vitamins as well as psychotherapy, though many have feared that the vitamins might interfere with their work. Outside the medical world of oncogenes and mutations, the understanding of cancer as a disorganization of metabolism and regulatory processes is advancing. Johanes Muller argued in 1840 that cancer might originate at the level of tissues, rather than in the nature of the individual cells making up the tissue. More recently, David Smithers described cancer as a problem of organization, analogous to a traffic jam, which can disrupt the system even while no particular vehicle is defective. Generally, this view speaks of a "cancer field," in which whole regions of an organ show different degrees of a precancerous or cncerous state. The "precancerous" condition of some of the cells within the cancer field can be shown to be induced by something emitted by seriously injured cells nearby. In radiation research, these effects are now described as the "bystander effect," in which unirradiated cells that are exposed to  radiation-damaged cells will develop some of the physiological features of the irradiated cells. Some kind of "toxic signal" has been released from an injured cell, inducing a similar injury in the healthy cells. Irradiated tissues respond with most of the features that are involved in general systemic stress--lipid peroxidation, free radicals, increased glycolysis, and a shift of metabolism toward production of the "emergency" factors that increase resistance in the short term. Other kinds of injury--overstimulation or energy deprivation, for example--cause cells to produce the same sorts of signals that affect surrounding cells. The extracellular matrix in which cells are embedded transmits these signals, partly by undergoing its own transformation into a differently structured matrix. Systemic metabolic problems make local problems worse, and if a local injury is serious, it can cause the liver to produce stress-related proteins called "acute phase proteins," including fibrinogen and serum amyloids A and P, C-reactive protein, and other inflammation-related proteins. These proteins are a primitive sort of immune system, that can directly bind to some harmful substances. Endotoxin absorbed from bowel bacteria is probably the commonest reason for increased production of these proteins. The acute phase proteins contribute to the development of tumors in various ways. For example fibrinogen are pro-inflammatory. Although these are called acute phase proteins, they sometimes might better be called chronic inflammation proteins, since they are associated with diabetes, cancer, and heart disease. The systemic principle of cancer involves the same inflammatory mechanisms that are involved in circulatory diseases, strokes, multiple sclerosis, multiple organ failure, etc. An inflammatory process that isn't controlled causes blood vessels to leak, and the process of disposing of the leaked materials, if the leakage is extensive, leads to reactions of the whole organism; usually, the signals reaching the higher levels of organization evoke a stress-limiting response, and stability is restored, but if conditions aren't just right, the stress-induced damage accumulates. With repeated injury, and with chronic accumulation of polyunsaturated fats, fibrosis, atrophy and inflammation increase, and the energetic intensity of corrective responses decreases. The first reaction to serious injury, challenge or deprivation is to prepare for growth and cell division. The simple production of lactic acid when oxygen supply isn't adequate causes blood vessels to dilate. Energy production becomes inefficient; the fatty acid synthesizing enzyme system is activated, even when large amounts of fat are being made available by lipolysis under the influence of stress. In proportion to the challenge, capillaries become more permeable, and cells may begin to enter the tissues from the bloodstream, along with water and nutrients. A surge of cell division allows renewal of damaged cells. If the inflammation persists, new capillaries grow, and larger vessels develop. Some of the immigrant cells may eat themselves to death removing debris, but others remain as colonists. Every inflammation is an incipient neoplasm. An organ such as the intestine, the liver, ovary, or thymus gland, is always in flux, renewing its cells, but when that renewal is disordered, the functions of the organ change, such that we speak of a neoplasm, a new growth, which in a sense is a new organ. It has been suggested (Zajicek) that the neoplastic organ has an adaptive, survival value, producing one or more substances that the body lacks. Zajicek supports his idea with careful analysis of cancer statistics, and points out that it's very common for the removal of a large tumor to be followed quickly by the appearance of myriad small tumors. He thinks it would be better to leave the original tumor in place. His orientation is in the tradition of "chalone" research, in which every tissue stops growing at the proper time because it emits a substance which specifically inhibits its own growth. Over the last 50 years the idea has been confirmed by many experiments, but it hasn't made any impression on the cancer industry. Stating the idea in very broad terms, we might say that aging or stress causes atrophic processes including "sarcopenia" and "osteopenia," the reduction of the mass of various tissues below the proper level, and that tumors are the result of an uneven attempt to restore the proper mass of tissue.  I think Zajicek's idea would be more acceptable if it were stated in more general terms, without denying the possible role of chalones, or something like chalones that tends to protect the body or suppress tumors. Using Le Chatelier's principle,* that a system adjusts to disturbance in a way that reduces the disturbance, we could say that one function of a tumor might be to dispose of something that has disturbed homeostasis. For example, insulin resistance produces an inability to oxidize glucose, and is associated with chronic hyperglycemia, or "type 2 diabetes." Diabetes of that type is associated with a high risk of cancer (e.g., Yam, et al., 1996). V.S. Shapot's decades of research led him to describe a tumor as a glucose scavenger (1979). When the system is disturbed by chronic hyperglycemia and an inability to use glucose, a sort of equilibrium will be restored by the production of a tumor that pumps glucose out of the system. Although tumors consume sugar and release lactic acid, they aren't really living on the sugar, they are doing something very odd: They convert a large amount of glucose into fat, and then oxidize the fat. The enzyme system, fatty acid synthase (FAS), is an effective way to dispose of glucose, because of its energetic inefficiency. Another way to look at Zajicek's idea is to recognize that the main cause of insulin resistance is the dietary consumption of (both omega -6 and omega -3) polyunsaturated fatty acid, and that the fats produced by the FAS in tumor cells are mainly saturated fatty acids, with some of the antiinflammatory omega -9 series. In this case, Zajicek's suggestion that the tumor is producing something the body needs would be literally correct. The same "epigenetic" processes that create our organs, under new conditions can create tumors. The doctrine of genetic determinism has almost reversed the basic meaning of "epigenetic," since developmental biologists talk as if developing organs were all programmed in the genome, and that they were created as if from a blueprint contained in the genes. During ordinary development, we think of epigenesis as a process that creates an organism in a certain environment, and we recognize that even the protected intrauterine environment allows great individuality of development, influenced by slight differences in conditions of nutrition, hormones, temperature, etc., during an individual's development. Epigenesis accounts for a lot of normal variation in traits-size of brain and other organs, rate of maturation, degree of pigmentation, etc.--and for many developmental defects. Epigenesis is an even more important concept for understanding tumors, despite the fact that so much money has been invested in explaining tumors according to oncogenes and other ideological inventions of the genetic determinists. Even oncogenes' expression is environmentally determined. The normal cyclic function of the ovaries is a model for the potentially creative role of an inflammation-like stress. Every month (in a rhythm influenced by many cues), a productive crisis comes to a focus in the ovary, with the formation of estrogen, prostaglandins, carbon monoxide, and other signal substances, causing rapid changes both locally and systemically, with water, hormones, and nutrients gathering around the ovum (as well as in other parts of the body, such as the feet). Then as the foilicle ruptures with the release of an ovum, the excitatory, inflammation-like state is resolved, with a massive increase in the production of the antiinflammatory, antistress substance, progesterone, leading to the suppression of the excitatory substances. These monthly processes are developmental, they are part of the epigenetic development of the organ. Most, if not all, of the substances involved in ovarian physiology are involved in the diseases of stress and degeneration, which progress in proportion to the inability to produce the resolution of inflammation and restoration of the stable condition. The ovary is a major source of estrogen, which can produce the excited, activated, inflammatory and proliferative state in any tissue of the body, though it acts mainly on the uterus, breasts, and pituitary. But the ovary is also, in response, able to produce massive amounts of the protective progesterone, which interrupts the inflammatory effects of estrogen on the various tissues and organs, largely by suppressing the proteins that hold estrogen within cells (especially the "estrogen receptor"), but also by changing the activities of many enzymes away from the  estrogen-controlled, inefficient pattern. The developmental actions of the ovary cause continuing epigenetic processes in other organs, causing noticeable changes in their structure every month. The ovary plays a specialized coordinating role in preparing the whole body for pregnancy, but most of its regulatory features can be seen in a diminished form in other organs, and in any tissue that is unable to completely resolve a crisis of inflammation. Considering ovarian processes and structures in detail will offer some insights into the processes that occur elsewhere during inflammation and tumefaction. One of the rules of classical mechanistic endocrinology was that a hormone doesn't act on the organ that produces it, and acts only on its "target organ," one with the special "receptors" that allow it to recognize and respond to the hormone. But now, all organs are known to contain "estrogen receptors," and many of those same organs can produce very significant amounts of estrogen. The ovary, according to the classical doctrine, wouldn't be able to respond to estrogen. Oral contraceptive manufacturers used that idea to argue that excessive estrogen couldn't cause ovarian cancer, and in fact prevented it, by preventing ovulation. But the cells of the ovary do respond to estrogen, multiplying, and during in vitro exposure, developing a pre-cancerous appearance. For more than 20 years, there has been clear evidence that use of supplemental estrogen increases the incidence of ovarian cancer. Related claims were made about estrogen and the prostate gland for more than 50 years: "Estrogen can't do anything to a male organ except to decrease its maleness," that is, it couldn't stimulate cell division or cause prostate cancer, but it would cause the prostate to shrink, and prevent prostate cancer. Many of those claims are still being made, and estrogen is still being prescribed to treat it by a large portion of the medical profession, though experiments are demonstrating estrogen's clear contribution to the prostate gland's degeneration into cancer. The ovary has been a focus of several types of ideology in biology, and as a result real investigation of ovarian physiology has been retarded for 100 years. Weismann's genetic doctrine of the "isolation of the germ line" led to a false theory of ovarian aging, the egg-depletion theory. Despite the absence of evidence for the finite-egg-supply theory, and the increasing accumulation of evidence that eggs are continually produced in adult ovaries, many people still cling to the unfounded theory. The real nature of ovarian aging is very similar to the aging of any organ, and the extreme specialization of the ovary makes some of the issues clearer when we look at analogous processes in other organs, such as the prostate, or breast, or uterus, or the "adventitious organs" of inflammation and tumefaction. In the normal ovary, under the influence of the pituitary follicle stimulating hormone, several pockets of fluid (primary follicles) begin forming in the ovary, and the largest of these follicles suppresses the development of the others, so that only one usually reaches full development. Under the influence of the pituitary luteinizing hormone, progesterone, and other substances, the ovum completes its meiosis, the follicle ruptures and the ovum along with the fluid containing a high concentration of estrogen is released. The cells that had surrounded and supported the ovum (granulosa cells) multiply to fill the space, forming the corpus luteum, the yellow body that produces mainly progesterone. The corpeus luteum is a thoroughly new organ that's produced periodically, under the influence of chains of interacting stimuli. Warburg's main point about cancer was that it always has a "respiratory defect," causing it to produce lactic acid even in the presence of oxygen (a process called aerobic glycolysis), while oxygen causes normal cells to suppress lactic acid formation (this is called the Pasteur effect). Warburg believed that this defect in the cells' energy production system meant that it lacked the ability to perform many of its normal functions, but that it remained able to divide. He also believed that oxygen deprivation was one of many stressors that could damage the cells' respiratory system, and he showed that even very small tumors are usually very hypoxic. Other experimenters (including Hans Selye) found that mechanical barriers such as a glass tube or a bent piece of plastic film implanted into an animals  tissues would cause cancer to develop among the enclosed cells (following a period of atrophy). There are a few normal situations in which aerobic glycolysis occurs--the retina, the ovarian follicle during its preparation for ovulation, the Sertoli cells of the testicle, which are involved in the maturation of sperm cells, and sometimes in the placenta. Except for the retina, these tissues are subject to strong stimulation by estrogen, which stimulates lactic acid formation while interfering with oxygen use. Aerobic glycolysis is associated with the formation of fatty acids (R.A. Walli, 1978), by the enzyme fatty acid synthase, which is increased by estrogen, and the activity of which corresponds to the malignancy of many types of cancer. Estrogen and other stimuli can cause the formation of lactic acid even in the presence of oxygen (i.e., aerobic glycolysis). Lactic acid has some hormone-like actions, causing, for example, vasodilation and increased permeability of capillaries. It has been suggested that it has some involvement in the process of meiosis, in the formation of mature germ cells. There are some compartments in the body that have very little oxygen, and that are damaged by increased oxygen. The thymus maintains a very low oxygen tension, but it has a strong Pasteur effect, so normally doesn't produce excess lactic acid. The testicle stops producing testosterone if the oxygen is increased too much. The vitreous body of the eye normally has low oxygen tension. A special feature of the ovary is that the cells around the ovum are not only isolated from the blood supply, causing localized hypoxia, but they are also (unlike the hypoxic thymus) stimulated by estrogen. In the expanded ovarian follicle, the ovum is a considerable distance from the closest blood vessels, and so it and its adjoining cells receive very little oxygen. Glucose diffuses into the follicle, and the granulosa cells around the ovum metabolize it into lactic acid. The concentration of lactate in the follicular fluid increases, along with estrogen, as the follicle matures, approaching ovulation. Immediately following ovulation, the granulosa cells multiply, filling the space that was formerly the follicle, and the blood vessels that had surrounded the follicle now infiltrate the developing corpus luteum, so that it receives an abundant oxygen supply as it begins forming progesterone. The permutations of these variations in oxygen tension, glucose supply, and excitatory stimulation can account for a variety of developmental processes, and the resulting concentrations of lactic acid, carbon dioxide, fatty acids, and pH increase the range of formative possibilities. Carbon monoxide has the ability to mimic hypoxia even in the presence of oxygen. Estrogen, in many different organs, increases the production of the enzyme heme oxygenase, which produces carbon monoxide, which inhibits respiration and also inhibits a variety of enzymes that use the heme group. (Tian, et al., 2003, 2004; Tschugguel, et al., 2001). In the ovary, carbon monoxide increases the production of estrogen, but decreases the production of progesterone. An excess of estrogen, acting partly through the increased carbon monoxide, blocks the formation of progesterone, and prevents a successful ovulation. These are just some of the interactions within the ovary that are similar to processes in the cancerization process wherever it occurs. Any inflamed tissue becomes subject to estrogenic stimulation, by the activation of enzymes, especially beta-glucuronidase, which cause estrogen to be deposited in the cells. Any hypoxic tissue, including inflammations of any sort, will express the heme oxygenase enzyme, producing carbon monoxide. Presumably, in the short term, these increases of estrogen and carbon monoxide have their adaptive functions, such as stimulating cell division for healing, and blocking some kinds of free radicals and excessive calcium uptake. But, as in the ovary, when the system isn't able to suppress them, they become self-sustaining, and begin to spread their influence to neighboring cells. Cancer cells are very resistant to injury from free radicals, which in normal cells accelerate the spontaneous dissolution called apoptosis, and carbon monoxide is one of their defense mechanisms, that makes them relatively immortal (Ghattas, et al., 2002). When an organism is functioning normally and adapting to stresses, the operation of a functional system, including the part of the nervous system that coordinates the function, causes that system to be stabilized, and to become more efficient, and even to grow. Work causes muscles and bones to enlarge and become stronger, learning causes the brain to grow. Chronic inflammations have some of the properties of a functional system, with participation of the nervous system, adjustments of the immune system, and changes in the circulatory system, except that the normal and desirable functions are progressively lost, rather than improved. The operation of the short term protective measures contribute, if they persist too long, to atrophy and fibrosis, and potentially, to disordered growth. In some cases, we know that an excess of stimulation, in reaction to the organ's reduced functioning, promotes the growth and spread of a tumor, for example, prolactin contributes to breast cancer, thyrotropic hormone to thyroid cancer, and gonadotropin to ovarian cancer. Ovarian teratomas are now believed to be parthenogenic, deriving from an unfertilized ovum, and I have suspected that the direction of their development reflects the endocrine situation, for example when a teratoma consisting of thyroid tissue appears in a woman who has taken extremely big doses of iodine for a long time. In the chronic inflammatory state that develops with stress and aging, besides the extrinsic stimuli that were the subject matter of classical endocrinology--pituitary hormones driving the ovaries, ovarian hormones driving the uterus, etc.--the inflamed tissues begin to stimulate themselves: The breast and uterus begin to synthesize estrogen, for example. Some of the things produced by tumors, such as estrogen and carbon monoxide, appear to be the result of a short-term adaptive factor that becomes maladaptive when the system can't turn it off. It's generally assumed that when a tumor produces a hormone, its effects will necessarily be harmful, but sometimes it isn't clear whether they are harmful or beneficial, and in a few cases, they clearly seem to be beneficial. Many cancers cause a great increase in the concentration of calcium in the blood, and this is often the result of the production of parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTH-rP) by the tumor. In some cases, PTH-rP can induce apoptosis by causing cells to take up calcium, but in other cases it is a survival factor, for example for nerve cells in the brain. Some experiments show that increased calcium in a tissue suppresses heme oxygenase and carbon monoxide (Zhang, et al., 2003, 2004). PTH-rP and the parathyroid hormone itself have some functions that overlap with those of vitamin D, which is now known to help to suppress many cancers. Inhibitors of fatty acid synthase cause many types of cancer cells to die. Vitamin D, which stops the growth of breast, prostate, and bowel cancer cells, inhibits FAS (Qiao, et al., 2003). This could be another example of Zajicek's principle, since it has been discovered that prostate and other cancer cells are able to create the active form of vitamin D. Vitamin D also acts as an antiestrogen, and estrogen is a factor in the development prostate cancer, breast cancer, and many other types of cancer (Swami, et al., 2000; Demirpence, et al., 2001). In some cancers, vitamin D operates through ceramide (Pirianov and Colston, 2001), Palmitic acid, is a product of FAS and a component of ceramide, which inhibits cancer cell growth. Understanding the causes of tissue atrophy as a failure of energy that allows inflammation to become chronic, leading to a disorganized attempt to regenerate tissue and stabilize the system, our response to both atrophy and cancer should be to restore metabolic processes of the highest type, based on the oxidation of glucose with the production of carbon dioxide, rather than lactic acid and fatty acids, and to eliminate inflammation and its products that have disrupted the normal balance between cell renewal and cell elimination. Aspirin, by inhibiting the production of estrogen, of carbon monoxide, and of several cytokines and toxic lipid products, and by supporting normal respiration, helping to correct hyperglycemia, and suppressing lactate production, is an especially valuable therapy. Sacca et al., have recently (October, 2004) demonstrated that aspirin's anticancer effect appears to involve the inhibition of heme oxygenase. Caffeine, by inhibiting FAS and sparing glucose, and inhibiting many of the toxic lipid  products and other inflammatory mediators, at least additive effects when should have combined with aspirin. Vitamin D, by its antiestrogenic and antiinflammatory actions, and by suppressing FAS, parallels the effects of aspirin and caffeine in several ways. Gelatin, by lowering serotonin, should help to prevent excessive activation of heme oxygenase and formation of carbon monoxide during injury or stress (on the role of serotonin: Sharma and Westman, 2003; Sharma, et al., 2003). The lower incidence of, and mortality from, cancer at high altitudes might partly be explained by experiments that show that reduced atmosoxygen tension down-regulates pheric heme oxygenase in human cells (Kitamuro, 2003). 
REFERENCES
 Riv Biol. 2002 Jan-Apr;95(1):35-61. Towards a morphogenetic perspective on cancer. Aranda-Anzaldo A. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2000 Nov-Dec;36(10):657-66. Estrogen stimulation of ovarian surface epithelial cell proliferation. Bai W, Oliveros-Saunders B, Wang Q, Acevedo-Duncan ME, Nicosia SV. Wound Repair Regen. 2004 Mar-Apr;12(2):235-43. Influence of topical administration of n-3 and n-6 essential and n-9 nnessential fatty acids on the healing of cutaneous wounds. Cardoso CR, Souza MA, Ferro EA, Favoreto S Jr, Pena JD. "Injury triggers a series of physiological events at the wound site. These include an inflammatory response that is established shortly after the injury, which is then followed by an intense formation of tissue over a period of days." "We found that n-9 fatty acids induced faster wound closure when compared to n-3, n-6, and control. In addition, n-9 fatty acids strongly inhibited the production of nitric oxide at the wound site." Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1974;230:111-41. Spontaneous regression of cancer: the metabolic triumph of the host? Cole WH. Exp Neurol. 1978 May 15;60(1):41-55. Evidence of normal mitosis with complete cytokinesis in central nervous system neurons during sustained depolarization with ouabain. Cone CD Jr, Cone CM. Nat New Biol. 1973 Nov 28;246(152):110-1. Stimulation of DNA synthesis in CNS neurones by sustained depolarisation. Stillwell EF, Cone CM, Cone CD Jr. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1971 Mar;46(3):655-63. Intercellular transfer of toxic components after laser irradiation. May JF, Rounds DE, Cone CD. J Theor Biol. 1971 Jan;30(1):151-81. Unified theory on the basic mechanism of normal mitotic control and oncogenesis. Cone CD Jr. Oncology. 1971;25(2):168-82. Control of somatic cell mitosis by simulated changes in the transmembrane potential level. Cone CD Jr, Tongier M Jr. Acta Cytol. 1969 Oct;13(10):576-82. Autosynchrony and self-induced mitosis in sarcoma cell networks. Cone CD Jr. J Submicrosc Cytol Pathol 1998 Jul;30(3):371-7. Ultrastructure of hepatocyte abnormalities in perimetastatic areas. Correa ME, Finol HJ, Marquez A, Sosa L, Diaz NL "These results show that, contrary to the classical conception, the non-invaded cells surrounding primary tumours or their metastases could be anormal." Cancer Res. 1994 Mar 15;54(6):1458-64. Antiestrogenic effects of all-trans-retinoic acid and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 in breast cancer cells occur at the estrogen response element level but through different molecular mechanisms. Demirpence E, Balaguer P, Trousse F, Nicolas JC, Pons M, Gagne D. Northwest Med. 1971 Aug;70(8):539-43. Spontaneous remission of proven cancer. Eidemiller LR, Fletcher WS, Dennis DL, Krippaehne WW. Int J Cancer. 2004 Mar10;109(1):1-8. Enhancement of chemotherapeutic response of tumor cells by a heme oxygenase inhibitor, pegylated zinc protoporphyrin. Fang J, Sawa T, Akaike T, Greish K, Maeda H. Apoptosis. 2004 Jan;9(1):27-35. Antiapoptotic role of heme oxygenase (HO) and the potential of HO as a target in anticancer treatment. Fang J, Akaike T, Maeda H, Cancer Res. 2003 Jul 1;63(13):3567-74. In vivo antitumor activity of pegylated zinc protoporphyrin: targeted inhibition of heme oxygenase in solid tumor. Fang J, Sawa T, Akaike T, Akuta T, Sahoo SK, Khaled G, Hamada A, Maeda H. Anat Rec 100, 659. (1948). "The affinity of neoplastic, embryonic and traumatised tissue for porphyrins and metalloporphyrins." Figge FHJ, Weiland GS Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. - 1948. - Vol. 68. - P. 640-641. Cancer detection and therapy. Affinity of neoplastic, embryonic, and traumatized tissues for porphyrins and metalloporphyrins. Figge F.H.J., Weiland G.S., Manganiello O.J. Gut 1995 Jun;36(6):857-63. Colonic epithelium is diffusely abnormal in ulcerative colitis and colorectal cancer. Gibson P, Rosella O, Nov R, Young G. Endocrinology 1996 Nov;137(11):4536-41. The cellular protooncogenes c-fos and egr-1 are regulated by prostacyclin in rodent osteoblasts and fibroblasts. Glantschnig H, Varga F, Klaushofer K. " ... we showed that PGI2 dose dependently stimulated new DNA synthesis in the osteoblastic cell line MC3T3-El." Leg Med (Tokyo). 2003 Mar;5 Suppl 1:S360-6. Age-associated increases in heme oxygenase-1 and ferritin immunoreactivity in the autopsied brain. Hirose W, Ikematsu K, Tsuda R. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 Sep 2;94(18):9614-9. Dominant transformation by mutated human ras genes in vitro requires more than 100 times higher expression than is observed in cancers. Hua VY, Wang WK, Duesberg PH. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):9125-33. Epub 2003 Jan 02. Bach1 functions as a hypoxia-inducible repressor for the heme oxygenase-1 gene in human cells. Kitamuro T, Takahashi K, Ogawa K, Udono-Fujimori R, Takeda K, Furuyama K, Nakayama M, Sun J, Fujita H, Hida W, Hattori T, Shirato K, Igarashi K, Shibahara S. Int J Cancer. 2003 May 20;105(1):1-6. Elevation of de novo ceramide synthesis in tumor masses and the role of microsomal dihydroceramide synthase. Koyanagi S, Kuga M, Soeda S, Hosoda Y, Yokomatsu T, Takechi H, Akiyama T, Shibuya S, Shimeno H. Science. 1976 Jan 23;191(4224):293-5. What retains water in living cells? Ling GN, Walton CL. Three types of evidence are presented showing that the retention of cell water does not necessarily depend on the possession of an intact cell membrane. The data agree with the concept that water retention in cells is due to multilayer adsorption on proteins and that the maintenance of the 19 normal state of water relies on the presence of adenosine triphosphate as a cardinal adsorbent, controlling the protein conformations. Dis Colon Rectum 1992 Sep;35(9):879-83. Proliferative activity of colonic mucosa at different distances from primary adenocarcinoma as determined by the presence of statin: a nonproliferation-specific nuclear protein. Kyzer S, Mitmaker B, Gordon PH, Schipper H, Wang E. "The field change is one hypothesis concerning the development of colorectal carcinoma. Removal of a carcinoma without its entire surrounding altered mucosa may result in the development of a recurrence." 1 Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2002 Feb;22(2):183-95. 17-beta-estradiol induces heat shock proteins in brain arteries and potentiates ischemic heat shock protein induction in glia and neurons. Lu A, Ran RQ, Clark J, Reilly M, Nee A, Sharp FR. Urology, 1996 May, 47:5, 727-33. Expression of heme oxygenase-1 (HSP32) in human prostate: normal, hyperplastic, and tumor tissue distribution. Maines MD; Abrahamsson PA. "The finding that HO-I expression is increased in BPH and malignnt prostate tissue is consistent with a role for this stress protein in the pathogenesis of BPH and prostate cancer; in the context of iron metabolism, an argument is made in support of this possibility." Med Hypotheses. 1998 May;50(5):359-62. Expression of the c-erbB-2-encoded oncoprotein p185 (HER-2/neu) in pregnancy as a model for oncogene-induced carcinogenesis. Mielke S, Meden H, Kuhn W. Blood. 1992 Mar 1;79(5):1255-9. Heme oxygenase is a positive acute-phase reactant in human Hep3B hepatoma cells. Mitani K, Fujita H, Kappas A, Sassa S. Nature. 1968 Oct 12;220(163):138-9. Melanoma regression induced by "chalone": a new tumour inhibiting principle acting in vivo. Mohr U, Althoff J, Kinzel V, Suss R, Volm M, Zentralbl Gynakol. 1982;104(2):111-6. lAction of oestrogens on in vitro metabolism of trophoblast from human early pregnancy][Article in German] Nagy P, Csaba IF. Warburg's manometric method was used to check the action of oestrone, oestradiol, and oestriol on aerobic and anaerobic glycolysis of placental respiration. Oestrogen concentrations of 10(-4) M were found to reduce oxygen consumption and to increase aerobic glycolysis. Such reduction of oxygen consumption was most strongly pronounced in connection with oestradiol, while the strongest rise in acrobic glycolysis took place in the wake of oestradiol and oestrone. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Feb 14;172(1-2):69-78. Interactions of vitamin D analogue CB1093, TNFalpha and ceramide on breast cancer cell apoptosis. Pirianov G, Colston KW. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 May;85(!):1-8. Inhibition synthase of fatty acid expression by 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 in prostate cancer cells. Qiao S, Pennanen P, Nazarova N, Lou YR, Tuohimaa P. " 1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (1 alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3)) and its derivatives are a potential treatment of human prostate cancer." "The inhibition of FAS expression and cell proliferation by Ialpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) seemed to be androgen-dependent, since antiandrogen, casodex and DCC-treatment of serum blocked the vitamin D action. The findings suggest that FAS is involved in the antiproliferative effect of Ialpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) in presence of androgens on prostate cancer LNCaP cells." Int J Gynecol Pathol. 1997 Jan;16(1):45-51. Expression of fatty acid synthase is closely linked to proliferation and stromal decidualization in cycling endometrium. Pizer ES, Kurman RJ, Pasternack GR, Kuhajda FP. "Estrogen-driven proliferative phase growth is the most rapid physiological proliferative process that occurs in the adult." "Fatty acid synthase (FAS) is the major biosynthetic enzyme required for de novo synthesis of fatty acids." "Proliferative endometrial glands and stroma show high FAS expression that closely correlates with expression of Ki-67, estrogen and progesterone receptors, supporting the view that FAS expression plays a role in cellular proliferation in response to estrogen." Cancer. - 1955. - Vol. 1. - P. 78-81. Fluorescence of human lymphatic and cancer tissues following high doses of intravenous hematoporphyrin. Rasmussen D.S., Ward G.E., Figge F.H.J. Int J Biochem 1982;14(9):783-6. Inhibition of anaerobic glycolysis in bovine retina extracts by salicylate and acetylsalicylate. Rinaudo MT, Curto M, Bruno R, Ponzetto C Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;36(10):1945-53. Cell cycle arrest and modulation of HO-1 expression induced by acetyl salicylic acid in hepatocarcinogenesis. Sacca P, Caballero F, Batlle A, Vazquez E. "HO-1 induction (65%) provoked by DAB was diminished by ASA administration reaching lower induction levels (23%)." Int J Cancer 1998 Nov 23;78(5):568-75. Multifocal accumulation of p53 protein in esophageal carcinoma: evidence for field cancerization. Tian D, Feng Z, Hanley NM, Setzer RW, Mumford JL, DeMarini DM. "The sporadic distribution of p53+ cells and the distribution and frequency of p53+ precursor lesions support the view that accumulation of p53 protein is multifocal and occurs in precursor lesions in early stages of esophageal carcinogenesis." Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Mar;1012:84-93. Heme oxygenase-l: transducer of pathological brain iron sequestration under oxidative stress. Schipper HM. "A model is presented implicating glial HO-1 induction as a "final common pathway" leading to pathological iron sequestration and mitochondrial insufficiency in a host of human CNS disorders." 2000 Sep;35(6-7):821-30. Heme Exp Gerontol. oxygenase-1: role in brain aging and neurodegeneration. Schipper HM. Adv. Cancer Res., 30, 89-150 (1979). On the multiform relationships between the tumor and the host. Shapot, V.S. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2003;86:389-94. Depletion of endogenous serotonin synthesis with p-CPA attenuates upregulation of constitutive isoform of heme oxygenase-2 expression, edema formation and cell injury following a focal trauma to the rat spinal cord. Sharma HS, Westman J. "These observations suggest that (i) spinal cord injury has the capacity to induce an upregulation of HO-2 and HSP expression, (ii) abnormal production of CO as reflected by HO-2 expression is injurious to the cord, and (iii) that endogenous serotonin is involved in HO-2 expression in the cord." Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2003;86:313-9. Antioxidant compounds EGB-761 and BN-52021 attenuate brain edema formation and hemeoxygenase expression following hyperthermic brain injury in the rat. Sharma HS, Drieu K, Westman J. Proc R Soc Med. 1967 Jan;60(1):1. Malignant melanoma: Regression of metastases after excision of primary growth. Stidolph NE. Angiogenesis. 2003;6(1):15-24. Heme oxygenase-1 accelerates tumor angiogenesis of human pancreatic cancer. Sunamura M, Duda DG, Ghattas MH, Lozonschi L, Motoi F, Yamauchi J, Matsuno S, Shibahara S, Abraham NG Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Jun;9(6):2204-12. Expression of fatty acid synthase as a prognostic indicator in soft tissue sarcomas. Takahiro T, Shinichi K, Toshimitsu S. Int J Cancer 1998 Nov 23;78(5):568-75. Multifocal accumulation of p53 protein in esophageal carcinoma: evidence for field cancerization. Tian D, Feng Z, Hanley NM, Setzer RW, Mumford JL, DeMarini DM. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2004 Feb 25;56(1):54-9. [Effect of sex hormones on heme oxygenase expression in rat ventral prostate] [Article in Chinese] Tian J, Zheng Y, Yang C. "In groups of exogenous administration of androgen and estrogen HO-1 was much higher than that in the control groups (p<0.01). However, estrogen increased HO-1 protein level in prostate stroma, while the levels of HO-2 did not give any evidence of change among all groups (p>0.05). These findings suggest that expression of HO-I gene is induced by sex hormones, in contrast, there is no change in HO-2 expression. We speculate that CO-HO system is possibly involved in the pathologic processes of prostates abnormal proliferation induced by sex hormones and that CO derived from HO-1 may play an important role in the regulation of smooth muscle activity in rat prostate." Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2003 Apr;34(2):234-7. [Expression of heme oxygenase-1 in rat prostate and effects of androgen and estrogen on it] [Article in Chinese] Tian J, Zheng Y, Zhang J, Yang C, Wang J, Zhang Z. Department of Physiology, Chengdu Military Medical College of Third Military University, Chengdu 610083, China. "The levels of HO-1 mRNA transcription and HO-1 protein expression in the castrated group were markedly decreased, compared with those in normal control group (P < 0.01); But both these levels in the groups of castration plus exogenous androgen and castration plus exogenous estrogen were much higher than those in the control group (P < 0.01). Furthermore, estrogen could increase the level of HO-1 protein expression in prostatic stroma. CONCLUSION: Carbon monoxide-heme oxygenase system might be involved in the pathologic processes of prostatic abnormal proliferation." J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Aug;86(8):3833-9. Estrogen increases endothelial carbon monoxide, heme oxygenase 2, and carbon monoxide-derived cGMP by a receptor-mediated system. Tschugguel W, Stonek F, Zhegu Z, Dietrich W, Schneeberger C, Stimpfl T, Waldhoer T, Vycudilik W, Huber JC. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1978 Feb 13;539(1):62-80. Interrelation of aerobic glycolysis and lipogenesis in isolated perfused liver of well-fed rats. Walli RA. "The total rate of de novo fatty acid synthesis was correlated with the formation of lactate and pyruvate. It is concluded that increased rates of aerobic glycolysis are related to increased rates of lipogenesis." Isr J Med Sci. 1996 Nov;32(11):1134-43. Diet and diseasethe Israeli paradox: possible dangers of a high omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid diet. Yam D, Eliraz A, Berry EM. "... Israeli Jews may be regarded as a population-based dietary experiment of the effect of a high omega-6 PUFA diet, a diet that until recently was widely recommended. Despite such national habits, there is paradoxically a high prevalence of cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and obesityall diseases that are associated with hyperinsulinemia (HI) and insulin resistance (IR), and grouped together as the insulin resistance syndrome or syndrome X. There is also an increased cancer incidence and mortality rate, especially in women, compared with western countries." Anticancer Res 1999 Nov-Dec;19(6A):4907-12, Pernicious cachexia: a different view of cancer. Zajicek G Z Kardiol. 2004 Feb;93(2):109-15. Alteration of hemeoxygenase-carbon monoxide pathway in calcified rat vascular smooth muscle cells. Zhang B, Wang S, Pang Y, Tang C, Du J. "Compared with VSMCs, HO-1 activity in calcified cells decreased by 42.7% . . and HbCO formation decreased by 39.2%. .. The cGMP content in calcified VSMCs was 78.1% lower than that of non-calcified VSMCs ... " Life Sci. 2003 Jan 17:72(9):1027-37. Changes of heme oxygenase-carbon monoxide system in vascular calcification in rats. Zhang B, Tang C, Du J. "Vascular calcification model was established in rats by using vitamin D(3) and nicotine." "Compared to those of control rats, the aortic calcium content and vascular ALP activity in rats of the calcified group (VDN group) were obviously increased, but HO 1 activity, CO concentration and cGMP content in vessels of rats in VDN group were markedly decreased. Expressions of HO-1 protein and mRNA were significantly decreased compared to control rats. Vascular calcification might induce a down regulation in vascular HO-CO-cGMP pathway." **