 Cholesterol in Context  
Part II: A Formative Medium
“The experts” used to speak of cholesterol as a
waxy substance that causes atherosclerosis, butnow they always add that it’s also an essentialmaterial that’s needed for making cell membranes,bile acids, and steroid hormones. That common
way of describing cholesterol is hardly an
improvement.
From about the middle of the 19th century, the
word “protoplasm” was used to describe the jelly-like living substance, and the word colloid (glue-like, resembling gelatin) began to be used aroundthe same time, along with the older word emulsion,to describe the living material. The complex physi-cal and chemical properties of various artificialcolloids and emulsions were increasingly studiedin comparison to living protoplasm.  Between 1900and 1950, these comparisons led to important newinsights into bioelectricity and metabolism, and theability of cells to regulate their interactions withtheir environment. 
In the 1920s, a Dutch chemist, H. G. Bungen-
berg de Jong, found that when solutions of differ-ent polymers, such as gelatin and acacia gum, weremixed, they separated into two phases, almost likeoil and water, with one phase containing a higherconcentration of the two polymers, and less water,than the other phase. He called this spontaneousrearrangement of dissolved polymers “coacerva-tion,” meaning “clumping together.” When varioussalts were added, the ions were non-randomlydistributed between the two phases, and an electri-cal potential difference was maintained betweenthe two phases. A change in the concentration of a single salt
could cause the proportion of solid and liquidphases to change. Changing temperature, pressure,or pH, could change the balance of the phases,altering the distribution of ions or other dissolvedsubstances. For example, in a particular coacer-vate, lowering the temperature slightly causes thesolids to be slowly dissolved, leaving a singleliquid phase; with a return to the original tempera-ture, the solid phases reappear, along with anunequal distribution of the dissolved substances. 
It is evident that, at present, we
are not going to give up the massfaith in scientific technology thatis the religion of modern times;and yet we cannot continue withit, as it has been perverted. So Ilook for a "New Reformation."                                      
Paul Goodman
The coacervate systems behave in even more
complex ways when they contain more than twokinds of polymer, for example when they containprotein, polysaccharides, and nucleic acids, aswell as fats or other lipids, sugars, and salts. Anychange, anywhere in the system, causes a holisticadjustment of the whole system, that can involvechanges of structures and their affinities.
The coacervation process permits compart-
mentalization and specialization of functionswithin cells, but a few substances, along withwater, are ubiquitous in the living state; choles-terol is one of those.Ray Peat's Newsletter
“Those who have the privilege to know, have the duty to act.”   Albert Einstein
Copyright 2018       Raymond Peat  P.O. Box 5764  Eugene OR  97 405        November 2018
Not for republication without written permission.The maintenance of a non-random distribution
of ions and other solutes, and the existence of anelectric potential difference, were the reasons thatsome people had postulated the existence of asemi-permeable membrane around cells. The workof Bungenberg de Jong and his colleagues showedthat no membrane was needed to explain thoseproperties of living cells. 
Modifying an extremely
complex system, the livingsubstance, cholesterol partici-pates in complexity, and mustbe investigated with subtlety.  
To many people, this perspective made it clear
that important aspects of the living substance couldbe understood holistically in terms of its structuralreactions to the physical environment that couldcontribute, alternatively, to maintaining an equilib-rium, or to growing, or to degenerating.
In the 1940s, use of the new electron micro-
scope failed to show the barrier membrane aroundcells that some people had postulated. GilbertLing, who developed the “Ling-Gerard glassmicroelectrode,” showed why he believed that theelectrode was registering a phase potential, ratherthan a membrane potential. Ling, D.N. Nasonov,A.S. Troshin, and others showed not only that thepostulated regulatory cell membrane was unneces-sary, but that it was impossible. The surface of acell is the boundary between phases, and within acell there are slight variations in phase, but (exceptin the case of vacuoles) there is no place for thewatery solution supposedly enclosed by a barriermembrane.
By the 1950s, a model of the living cell had
become official, in which the cell was controlledby the inherited blueprint in the DNA, andoperated through the chemical reactions producedby enzymes in a watery solution, acting on materi-als that they encountered through random colli-sions with dissolved substances. Biochemistry, as aprofession if not a science, was based on theassumption of random diffusion of substrates andenzymes in a watery solution. It was consideredridiculous to suggest that emulsifying cells and
suspending their enzymes in water might notaccurately reflect what happens in living cells. 
From the perspective of people who knew the
parallel histories of cytology and coacervateresearch, the gene-membrane-random-solutionmodel of the cell seemed insane and/or stupid, butthat model was effectively kept in its dominantplace by the disregard for reality of those whocontrol the institutions of culture.
While the idea of the living substance as a
special condition of being  makes it possible to
understand health and sickness pragmatically andto investigate the organism’s interactions with itsenvironments coherently, the chemical andpharmaceutical cartels wanted a model of the celland organism that would rationalize the sale ofspecific substances to treat discrete diseases byacting on identified receptors or enzymes. Theidea that atherosclerotic heart disease is caused bycholesterol and can be prevented by poisoning theenzyme that makes cholesterol is the most profit-able achievement of that paradigm. The billions ofdollars gained from the statins have strengthenedthe place of the industry’s marketing paradigm inour culture, and the phrase “cholesterol is neededfor cell membranes” is a crucial part of thatparadigm.
The case against science is straight-
forward: much of the scientificliterature, perhaps half, may simplybe untrue.  Afflicted by studies withsmall sample sizes, tiny effects,invalid exploratory analyses, andflagrant conflicts of interest,together with an obsession forpursuing fashionable trends ofdubious importance, science hastaken a turn towards darkness.                                             Richard Horton
              
(editor-in-chief , the Lancet )
With aging, the organism’s reduced function-
ality is paralleled by structural changes. Thesteady decrease of tissue water content is one of2the most noticeable features of aging. It has been
known for several decades that the production ofprogesterone and DHEA decreases steadily withaging, and in recent years it has been noticed thatwhen aged skin is exposed to sunlight it producesonly half as much vitamin D as young skin does.Old skin has about half as much cholesterol asyoung skin, so it isn’t surprising that thosesubstances derived from it are reduced. 
In old skin and other organs, including the
brain, the synthesis of cholesterol decreases withaging (Ghadially, et al., 1996; Stange, et al., 1984),although modified, combined forms of it accumu-late (sulfate and fatty acid esters). The increasedeffects of cortisol, and decreased effects of thyroidhormone, with aging contribute to the decreasedcholesterol synthesis with aging (Henze, et al.,1981; Rosenberg, et al., 1986).
The characteristic opacity of aged skin is the
result of an accumulation of layers of dead cells onthe surface. While the vital underlying skin cellscontain much less cholesterol than normal, theinert cells contain an increased amount of choles-terol sulfate. When the skin’s free cholesterolcontent is increased experimentally, the skinregains its ability to shed the dead superficial cells.When it’s lowered experimentally, as with a statin,the skin takes on the structure and appearance ofold skin. Aging seems to be a state of cholesterolstarvation. 
In allowing skin cells to shed naturally, choles-
terol is activating a proteolytic enzyme and restor-ing the skin’s normal barrier function and acidicpH. At the same time it’s affecting many otherprocesses, including mitochondrial respiration(Kaufmann, et al., 2006). The well known sideeffect of the statins, rhabdomyolysis (muscle celldisintegration) is known to involve damage to themitochondria. Exercise, placing a large energydemand on muscle, increases the risk of damagewhen a statin is present.  
Low serum cholesterol has been associated
with depression, suicide, violence, and increasedcancer mortality. Since statins enter the brain, andinhibit the synthesis of cholesterol there, decreasedmitochondrial function is undoubtedly a factor inthe mental side effects that they can produce. Inanimals, the statins are known to cause birthdefects when they are given during pregnancy, andmitochondrial damage to the embryo is probably
one of the mechanisms.
The few people who have warned about some
of the harmful effects of the statins have suggestedthat it’s the reduced production of coenzyme Q10,ubiquinone, that impairs the mitochondrial energyfunction. However, there is evidence that theamount of cholesterol corresponds to themitochondria’s ability to produce ATP(Ziolkowski, et al., 2010; Ferreira, et al., 2003).
“At every step in the process,
there is room to distort results, away to make a stronger claim orto select what is going to beconcluded,” and there is an “intel-lectual conflict of interest thatpressures researchers to findwhatever it is that is most likely toget them funded.”   
             
  Dr. John P.A. Ioannidis
More than 250 proteins are specifically
adapted to binding cholesterol. These include theproteins of the cells’ structural, “skeletal,”proteins, such as the microtubules that form themitotic spindle, sorting the chromosomes appro-priately during cell division, and also the proteinsand DNA of the chromosomes, and the nuclearmatrix, and the filaments that control cell shapeand movement, the light transmitting fibers of thelens, and proteins that govern special functions ofmuscle contraction, nerve conduction, andsecretion.
Cholesterol’s functions are similar in many
ways to those of progesterone. In the pregnantuterus, for example, progesterone’s relaxingfunction is backed up by cholesterol (Smith, et al.,2005).  In the brain, excitation of nerves by gluta-mic acid is controlled by the uptake protein whichbinds this transmitter, and this protein’s functiondepends on cholesterol; reduction of cholesterolprolongs nerve excitation (Butchbach, et al.,2004).3About 60 years ago, Carl Lindegren, in Theory
of the Body Pattern , showed ways in which
changes in the centrosome of the ovum, and thecytoskeleton that it organizes, can cause abnor-malities in the structure of the body. At that time,the culture of biology was completely devoted tothe idea that the blueprint of the body was entirelycontained “in the genes,” that is, “coded in theDNA.” Experimenters had transplanted nucleifrom one phylum of animal into the egg cytoplasmof another phylum with a different body plan,demonstrating that at least the main scheme of thebody pattern is governed by the cytoplasm, buteven now the culture is only reluctantly starting tothink about the implications of this holistic view ofthe organism.
The apparent endemicity of bad
research behavior is alarming.  Intheir quest for telling a compellingstory, scientists too often sculpt datato fit their preferred theory of theworld.  Or they retrofit hypothesest o  f i t  t h e i r  d a t a .    .  .  .  O u r  l o v e  o f“signifcance” pollutes the literaturewith many a statistical fairy-tale.                                            
  Richard Horton
There is renewed interest in the primary cilium,
a little projection that nearly all our cells have,which is derived from the centriole after celldivision is completed, and the cell settles into itsdifferentiated functions. This cilium is a senseorgan, keeping the cell aware of its orientation andlocation in the body. For example, the primarycilia of the cells lining blood vessels all pointtoward the heart, whether they are in veins orarteries; they are oriented in relation to the bigpicture.
The gene system involved in embryonic devel-
opment, stem cells, and cancer, acts through theprimary cilium (Rohatgi, et al., 2007), and the“hedgehog” family of morphogenic proteinsrequires the attachment by an ester bond of acholesterol molecule to the protein, that permits itto be guided to the appropriate place of action tocontrol differentiation of cells in the right pattern.
The development of a new pattern is guided by theorientation already existing in thecentrosome-cilium-cytoskeletons. 
Within the cell nucleus, there is a highly
organized substance, the nuclear matrix, that inter-acts closely with the rest of the cytoskeleton,permitting DNA to be expressed according to thecell’s need as it responds to its environment.Cholesterol and other lipids are essential for thespecific highly organized interactions betweenDNA and the rest of the cell (Albi and Villani,2009).
When cultured cells are experimentally
“cholesterol starved” they are unable to completethe mitotic process, and are arrested in a tetraploidstate, with twice the normal number of chromo-somes (Martínez-Botas, et al., 1999). In thisarrested state they are unstable and, if cell divisionresumes, likely to form aneuploid (abnormalnumber of chromosomes) cancer cells  The tetra-ploid state becomes frequent in aging skin; one ofthe effects of ultraviolet light is to inhibit theformation of cholesterol. Aging and prematuredeath of the skin cells is a better outcome thancancerization; both can be produced by choles-terol deprivation.
Cholesterol is involved in the maintenance of
stem cells and the control of their maturation intofunctioning cells. A “cholesterol chelator,” cyclo-dextrin, which interferes with cellular cholesterol,causes cardiac stem cells to mature into function-ing heart muscle cells: “β-CD performed itsfunction by increasing the free intracellularcholesterol (Shi, et al., 2017).  
Another group using a cyclodextrin to reduce
the accumulation of the age pigment lipofuscin,found that the cyclodextrin increased cholesterolsynthesis (Gaspar, et al., 2017).
Excitatory transmission appears to contribute
to the loss of cholesterol in the brain during aging;the amount of cholesterol in synapses decreaseswith aging (Sodero, et al., 2011). Although excita-tory (glutamatergic) stimulation lowers braincholesterol, environmental enrichment (meaning-ful experience) increases it (Levi, et al., 2005),and also reverses the age-related decline in theneurosteroids derived from cholesterol (Rossetti,et al., 2015). 4In the brain, the accumulation of cholesterol
esters (at the expense of free cholesterol) increaseswith age and contributes to neurodegeneration.Intervention to liberate cholesterol from the fattyacids has a nerve-protecting effect in a wormmodel of Parkinson’s disease (Zhang, et al.,2017).  A great increase in cholesterol esters,relative to free cholesterol, has been seen in thechromosomes of cancer cells (Struchkov andStrazhevskaia, 1989; Struchkov, et al., 2002).
The “age pigment,” lipofuscin, is produced by
oxidation of polyunsaturated lipids. The polyun-saturated fatty acids, that accumulate with age,have been known for about 80 years to be the mainsource of this material. These fatty acids inhibit thesynthesis of cholesterol (Kuroda and Endo, 1976),and increase its conversion to cholesterol esters(Spector, et al., 1980). At birth, there is a very lowconcentration of cholesterol ester, and the propor-tion remains low until about the age of 20, whengrowth slows, and beyond the age of 20, thecholesterol esters accumulate at about five timesthe rate of cholesterol accumulation. After the ageof 40, the cholesterol esters become the maincomponent of the lipids of blood vessels (Smith,1974). The accumulation generally increases withage in other tissues, and the proportion seems tocorrelate with loss of function in viral disease andcancer as well as in aging. An increase of theesterification rate in the serum is a predictor ofheart disease and sudden death (Tanaka, et al.,2013).
The enzyme responsible for the harmful ester
formation is activated by highly polyunsaturatedfatty acids (Johnson, et al., 1983). It has beensuggested that the statins might act by way of the“essential fatty acids” (Das, 2001).
Although healthy tissues usually produce
enough cholesterol for their own needs, the glandsthat secrete large amounts of steroid hormonestake up considerable amounts of cholesterol fromthe blood, absorbing low density lipoprotein(LDL) cholesterol in proportion to their need. In anexperiment with blood-perfused ovaries, it wasfound that the amount of progesterone secretedvaried with the amount of LDL cholesterol in theblood. The increased serum cholesterol in stress isan important protective adaptation.In a study of several hundred people in their
seventies, it was found that in those whosebaseline total cholesterol was 195-244 mg/dL,“…each 10-mg/dL increase in the 1988-to-1991change in non-HDL-C was associated with anadjusted mortality odds ratio (OR) of 0.67…”(Karlamangla, et al., 2004).
During the last 65 years, industry-generated
recommendations to replace saturated fats in thediet by polyunsaturated fats, to “control choles-terol,” have been based on propaganda science,not objective science. With the passing of thegenerations that were indoctrinated with the ideasof random biochemical reactions, randommutations, semipermeable lipid bilayermembranes made of cholesterol and essential fattyacids with membrane pumps, a synthesis of thefragmentary insights about life that were achievedin the last century has become possible. 
Besides eliminating polyunsaturated fats (n-3
and n-6) from the diet to reduce the formation ofcholesterol esters and to reduce the decline ofcholesterol synthesis with aging, supplementingwith progesterone is a way to reduce the formationof esters (Synouri-Vrettakou and Mitropoulos,1983; Miller and Melnykovych, 1984; Jeng andKlem, 1984; Mulas, et al., 2011; Anchisi, et al.,2012). Lidocaine is another inhibitor of choles-terol ester formation (Bell, 1981; Bell, et al.,1982) that is probably useful in some degenerativeconditions.
          
REFERENCES
Commun Integr Biol. 2009 Jan-Feb; 2(1):
23–24. Nuclear lipid microdomains regulate
cell function. Albi E, Villani M.
Front Physiol. 2012; 3: 486. Cholesterol
homeostasis: a key to prevent or slow down
neurodegeneration. Anchisi L, Dessì S, Pani A,
Mandas A.  “… CE and ACAT1 appear to be5
Those who have the power to
act seem to think somebody elseshould act first.
  
                           Richard Hortonsuitable targets for anti-neurodegeneration drug
development. In this context, drugs able to reducethe rate of cholesterol esterification, such as ACATinhibitors, progesterone and rapamycin in particu-lar, are emerging as the best suited for thispurpose.”
   Can J Biochem. 1982;60(10):967-72. The
effect of lidocaine on cholesterol influx, esterifi-
cation, and accumulation in cultured cells.  Bell
FP, Rothblat GH, Bamberger M.
Atherosclerosis. 1981 Jan-Feb;38(1-2):81-8.
The effect of local anesthetics on arterial lipid
metabolism. Inhibition of sterol esterification invitro. Bell FP.
J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34388-96.
Association of excitatory amino acid transport-
ers, especially EAAT2, with cholesterol-richlipid raft microdomains: importance for excita-tory amino acid transporter localization andfunction. Butchbach ME, Tian G, Guo H, Lin CL.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential
Fatty Acids 65(1), 2001, 37-40. Essential fatty
acids as possible mediators of the actions of
statins.  Das UN.
Nutrition. 2004 Feb;20(2):230-4. Diets rich in
saturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids:
metabolic shifting and cardiac health. Diniz YS,
Cicogna AC, Padovani CR, Santana LS, Faine LA,Novelli EL.
Arch Toxicol. 2003 Apr;77(4):194-200.
Cholestasis induced by chronic treatment with
alpha-naphthyl-isothiocyanate (ANIT) affectsrat renal mitochondrial bioenergetics. Ferreira
FM, Oliveira PJ, Rolo AP , Santos MS, Moreno AJ,
da Cunha MF, Seiça R, Palmeira CM.
Sci Rep. 2017 May 19;7(1):2197.
2-Hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin (HPβCD)
reduces age-related lipofuscin accumulationthrough a cholesterol-associated pathway.
Gaspar J, Mathieu J, Alvarez P.
J Invest Dermatol. 1996 May;106(5):1064-9.
Decreased epidermal lipid synthesis accounts
for  altered barrier function in aged mice.
Ghadially R, Brown BE, Hanley K, Reed JT,Feingold KR, Elias PM.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1981 Nov
23;666(2):199-204. The effect of hydrocortisone
on cholesterol metabolism of cultured humanskin fibroblasts. Henze K, Kudchodkar BJ, Chait
A, Albers JJ, Bierman EL.
Neurochem Res. 1984 Sep;9(9):1193-210.
Acyl-CoA cholesterol acyltransferase in
cultured glioblastoma cells.  Jeng I, Klemm N.
Arteriosclerosis. 1983 May-Jun;3(3):242-8.
Dietary fat saturation and hepatic acylcoen-
zyme A:cholesterol acyltransferase activity.Effect of n-3 polyunsaturated and long-chainsaturated fat. Johnson MR, Mathur SN, Coffman
C, Spector AA.
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2004 Apr;52(4):487-94.
Increases in serum non-high-density lipopro-
tein cholesterol may be beneficial in some high-functioning older adults: MacArthur studies ofsuccessful aging.  Karlamangla AS, Singer BH,
Reuben DB, Seeman TE.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 63 (2006) 2415–2425.
Toxicity of statins on rat skeletal muscle
mitochondria . Kaufmann P, Török M, Zahno A,
Waldhauser KM, Brecht K, Krähenbühl S.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1976 Jan
18;486(1):70-81. Inhibition of in vitro choles-
terol synthesis by fatty acids.  Kuroda M, Endo
A. (The highly unsaturated fatty acids, arachi-
donate and linoleate, were specific inhibitors of
3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA synthase. )
J Neurochem. 2005 Nov;95(4):987-97.
Regulation of hippocampal cholesterol metabo-
lism by apoE and environmental stimulation.
Levi O, Lütjohann D, Devir A, von Bergmann K,Hartmann T, Michaelson DM.
 FASEB J. 1999 Aug;13(11):1359-70.  Choles-
terol starvation decreases p34(cdc2) kinase
activity and arrests the cell cycle at G2.
Martínez-Botas J, Suárez Y, Ferruelo AJ, Gómez-
Coronado D, Lasuncion MA.
J Lipid Res. 1984 Sep;25(9):991-9. Regula-
tion of cholesterol biosynthesis and esterifica-
tion by 25-hydroxycholesterol in amacrophage-like cell line: uncoupling byprogesterone . Miller SC, Melnykovych G.
Cell Prolif. 2011 Aug;44(4):360-71. Choles-
terol esters as growth regulators of lympho-
cytic leukaemia cells. Mulas MF, Abete C,
Pulisci D, Pani A, Massidda B, Dessì S, Mandas
A.
 “…exposure of leukaemic cells to two inhibi-
tors of cholesterol esterification, progesterone6and SaH 58-035, caused 60% reduction in their
proliferation rate.’
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar
3;106(9):3196-201. Hedgehog signal transduc-
tion by Smoothened: pharmacologic evidence
for a 2-step activation process. Rohatgi R,
Milenkovic L, Corcoran RB, Scott MP.
J Invest Dermatol. 1986 Mar;86(3):244-8.
Abnormal lipogenesis in thyroid hormone-
deficient epidermis.  Rosenberg RM, Isseroff RR,
Ziboh VA, Huntley AC.
Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 5;412:330-8.
Environmental enrichment attenuates the
age-related decline in the mRNA expression ofsteroidogenic enzymes and reduces the methyla-tion state of the steroid 5α-reductase type 1gene in the rat hippocampus. Rossetti MF,
Varayoud J, Moreno-Piovano GS, Luque EH,Ramos JG.
Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res. 2017
Aug;1864(8):1425-1434. β-Cyclodextrin induces
the differentiation of resident cardiac stem cells
to cardiomyocytes through autophagy.  Shi X, Li
W, Liu H, Yin D, Zhao J.
dv Lipid Res. 1974;12(0):1-49. The relation-
ship between plasma and tissue lipids in human
atherosclerosis. Smith EB.
Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005
May;288(5):C982-8. Increased cholesterol
decreases uterine activity: functional effects of
cholesterol alteration in pregnant ratmyometrium. Smith RD, Babiychuk EB, Noble
K, Draeger A, Wray S.
Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Jun;32(6):1043-53.
Cellular stress from excitatory neurotransmis-
sion contributes to cholesterol loss in hippocam-pal neurons aging in vitro. Sodero AO, Weiss-
mann C, Ledesma MD, Dotti CG.
Circulation. 2001 Aug 14;104(7):E9011-3.
Death rate higher in elderly with low choles-
terol. SoRelle R.
J Lipid Res. 1980 Feb;21(2):169-79.  Effect of
dietary fat saturation on acylcoenzyme
A:cholesterol acyltransferase activity of ratliver microsomes. Spector AA, Kaduce TL, Dane
RW.
J Lipid Res. 1984 Jul;25(7):703-13.
Age-related decreases in tissue sterol acquisi-
tion are mediated by changes in cholesterolsynthesis and not low density lipoprotein
uptake in the rat. Stange EF, Dietschy JM.
Bioelectrochemistry. 2002 Nov;58(1):23-30.
DNA-bound lipids of normal and tumor cells:
retrospective and outlooks for functionalgenomics.  Struchkov VA, Strazhevskaya NB,
Zhdanov RI.
Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1989
Sep;108(9):327-30. [Changes induced by sarco-
lysine in vivo in the composition of DNA-bound
lipids in sarcoma 37]  Struchkov VA, Strazhevs-
kaia NV.
Biochem J. 1983 Oct 1;215(1):191-9. On the
mechanism of the modulation in vitro of
acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase byprogesterone.  Synouri-Vrettakou S, Mitropoulos
KA.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013
May;33(5):1098-104. Increased serum choles-
terol esterification rates predict coronary heart
disease and sudden death in a general popula-tion.  Tanaka S, Yasuda T, Ishida T, Fujioka Y,
Tsujino T, Miki T, Hirata K.
Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Oct 1;26(19):3823-
3836. NCEH-1 modulates cholesterol metabo-
lism and protects against α- synuclein toxicity in
a C. elegans model of Parkinson's disease.
Zhang S, Glukhova SA, Caldwell KA, Caldwell
GA.
FEBS Lett. 2010 Nov 19;584(22):4606-10.
Methyl-beta-cyclodextrin induces mitochon-
drial cholesterol depletion and alters themitochondrial structure and bioenergetics.
Ziolkowski W, Szkatula M, Nurczyk A,
Wakabayashi T, Kaczor JJ, Olek RA, Knap N,Antosiewicz J, Wieckowski MR, Wozniak M
.
                 **********************7