Ray Peat's Newsletter 
We can't possibly hope to reform that which we do not understand. Julian Assange 
Copyright 2016 Raymond Peat P.O. Box 5764 Eugene OR 97405 September 2016 
Not for republication without written permission. 
Dangers of sadistic science: 
Determinism vs process thinking 
It's very common for people to talk about 
cancer as a localized disease, until it metastasizes, 
when it becomes a multitude of localized instances 
ofthat cancer. Occasionally, symptoms can appear 
in association with a tumor that involve abnormal 
function of a tissue or organ in which there are no 
cancer cells, and this is called a "paraneoplastic" 
syndrome-something which isn't cancer, but is 
caused by cancer. The idea of cancer as a 
"systemic disease" (as opposed to a localized 
disease) hardly fits into the contemporary medical 
culture, but several decades ago some people 
thought that processes throughout the body-in the 
digestive system, the nervous system, immune 
system, blood, kidneys, hormones, etc.-under­
went changes that allowed tumors to form. 
An advantage of thinking of cancer as a local:­
ized disease is that it fits into a deterministic view 
of the world, in which intrinsic defects in the 
molecules and cells of a tumor can explain its 
abnormal structure and behavior. These intrinsic 
defects could include "cancer genes" that were 
inherited, or genes that have been randomly altered 
during a person's life. The idea has led to attempts 
at "gene therapy," but the main focus has been on 
ways to identify the defective cells and to destroy 
them. 
If the essence of cancer isn't within the tumor, 
then a more complex kind of thinking about 
causality is needed, in which extrinsic factors are 
taken into account. The nature of the organism, 
and how it interacts with its environment, become 
relevant to the issue of understanding cancer. 
The ideology of mechanistic causality that 
motivated the hostile rejection of Pasteur's and Warburg's holistic metabolic ideas still exists in 
the Cancer Establishment. In 1971, the War on 
Cancer accelerated the search for a mutated gene 
or virus that was responsible for the "uncontrolled 
proliferation" of cancer cells. There has been 
increasing awareness that misconceptions about 
the nature of cancer accounted for the failure of 
the War on Cancer to produce objective results, 
and hundreds of publications in the last few years 
have focused on changes in metabolic pathways as 
the cause of cancer (e.g., Dang, 2012; Stine and 
Dang, 2013; Altman, et al., 2016). This shift has 
been paralleled by a growing understanding of the 
metabolic meanmg of inflammation, and an 
awareness of the role of inflammation in all the 
degenerative diseases. 
The evil that is in the world almost 
always comes of ignorance, and good inten­
tions may do as much harm as malevolence 
if they lack understanding. -Albert Camus 
In 2015 Dr. Soon-Shiong, a Los Angeles 
cancer billionaire, enlisted Vice President Biden 
in a publicity campaign (Cancer Moonshot) to 
promote the doctrine of gene mutation as the 
cause of cancer. Describing the Cancer Moonshot, 
Doug Lowy, Acting Director of the National 
Cancer Institute, says "cancer is a disease of the 
genome." The role of the government in this 
consortium, besides providing publicity, is to 
accelerate the approval of new cancer drugs. 
Sanjay Gupta is an integral part of Soon-Shiong's 
corporate publicity program. The White House 
has directed the Department of Defense and 12 
other government agencies to participate. 
Historically, after ordinary observation and 
science have identified an environmental cause of cancer, industries associated with the presence of 
the causative factor have invested heavily in a kind 
of science that challenges the validity of the link, 
usually arguing that the real cause is likely to be a 
pre-existing genetic defect in the victim. A tremen­
dous effort has gone into producing studies 
showing that smoke, estrogen, asbestos, and radia­
tion might not really be carcinogic, mutagenic, or 
otherwise toxic. In each of these cases, an industry 
gained 50 or more years of freedom from regula­
tion by arguing that if it isn't absolutely certain 
that their product will kill you, you shouldn't 
worry about it. Devra Davis's book, The Secret 
History of the War on Cancer, describes some of 
the methods used to keep the public from 
worrying. The doctrine of genetic determinism, of 
an innate propensity to develop a particular 
disease, has been very effective in distracting 
attention from actual avoidable causes of disease. 
The researchers, teachers, and doctors who have 
promoted this doctrine have generally believed it 
themselves. 
An exploratory, receptive attitude has become 
very uncommon among people with a career in 
science; the people who fund research want to be 
sure that something concrete will be achieved, and 
researchers who don't question well established 
assumptions are more likely to be funded than 
someone who wants to explore the implications of 
an unpopular assumption. A lack of curiosity is 
probably valued in proportion to the authoritarian­
ism of a situation and the degree of a person's 
need for approval from the authorities. A need for 
"certainty" displaces an interest in possibilities. 
Erich Fromm, in his 1941 book Escape from 
Freedom, wrote about sadism and masochism as 
aspects of the authoritarian character, striving, 
respectively, to control or to be controlled by 
others. In the hierarchical governments of the 
middle ages, one's place in society was largely 
hereditary, but the changes of the social order 
produced by the industrial revolution led to new 
ways of imposing, or challenging, authority. 
Natural science developed knowledge of ways to 
control nature, but the new knowledge became a 
challenge to religious and monarchic authority. At 
the same time, the ruling classes began fmding 
ways to use "science" to defend their interests. 2 
Darwin's cousin, Francis Galton, coined the term 
"eugenic" in explaining his ideas for improving 
the human species by controlled breeding, essen­
tially by limiting the reproduction of the inher­
ently inferior lower classes. In biology, the idea of 
inborn, hereditary traits of inferiority and superi­
ority implied that improvement came by eliminat­
ing the inferior. 
In the authoritarian societies that were the 
contemporary background for Fromm's study of 
character, social control in many cases involved 
literal sadism, such as performing surgical experi­
ments on prisoners without anesthetic. Their intel­
lectual framework was shared by many prominent 
biologists in England and the United States. The 
population-engineering of the eugenics movement 
became the genetic engineering of the molecular 
biologists. 
Power always thinks it has a great soul 
and vast views beyond the comprehension of 
the weak; and that it is doing God's 
service.... -John Adams 
Two famous experiments strongly influenced 
Anglo-American thinking about biology through 
much ofthe 20th century, leading in the 1950s to 
the Central Dogma of molecular biology, and to 
the free radical theory of aging. In the 1880s, 
August Weismann argued that germ cells are 
immortal, while the other "somatic" cells are 
mortal, and wear out from use, and that these two 
"cell lines" are perfectly isolated from each other, 
preventing information from the somatic cells 
from entering the germ cells. Francis Crick's 
Central Dogma simply restated Weismann's 
doctrine. Weismann's experiment, which he 
thought disproved the inheritance of acquired 
traits, involved the amputation of the tails of 1,592 
mice, over 22 generations. 
In the 1920s, Raymond Pearl refmed 
Weismann's idea of "wearing out" with his "rate 
of living" theory of aging. Pearl sprouted canta­
loupe seeds in a dish, and observed that the seed 
sprouts that grew fastest died soonest (the growth 
of a sprout involves the conversion of nutrients 
stored in the seed into active cells, depleting the nutrients). In the 1950s, Denham Hannan proposed 
that a high rate of living shortens the lifespan in 
the same way that ionizing radiation or a toxic 
excess of oxygen does, by accelerating the forma­
tion of free oxygen radicals that cause cumulative 
damage, especially to DNA molecules. 
Weismann's mouse mutilation and Pearl's seed 
sprouting were remarkably stupid experiments, 
which had absolutely nothing to do with the claims 
based on them, but they were fantastically success­
ful propagandistically, and they resonated over the 
years with the prejudices of millions of professors, 
editors, and authorities of all sorts. 
Pearl undoubtedly knew that death from starva­
tion (providing the seeds nothing but water) didn't 
say anything about death resulting from aging, 
which results from a progressive inability to 
adaptively assimilate available resources. In 
Weismann's time, it was commonly understood 
that Lamarck believed that the changes of an 
organism's form and function that were acquired 
in the process of adapting to a particular environ­
ment could be passed on to subsequent 
generations. Although it's possible that Weismann 
hadn't read Lamarck and ignored the basic role of 
biological need in his idea of adaptation, it's much 
more likely that both he and, a generation later, 
Pearl, understood that even a bad metaphor was 
good enough when the audience had a strong need 
to be convinced. 
In 1954, Barry Commoner's research group 
described their measurements of free radicals in 
living tissues. Until then, the official view was that 
free radicals were very toxic and completely 
incompatible with life. It was around this time that 
it occurred to Denham Hannan that the production 
of free radicals in the process of oxidative metabo­
lism might be a mechanism to explain the degen­
erative processes of aging. Hannan's earlier work 
as a Shell petroleum chemist (including work on 
insecticides) defined his view of biological free 
radicals. 
He suggested that the mitochondrion is "the 
true biological clock" of aging, Although supple­
menting antioxidants could reduce some diseases 
in his experimental animals and increase their 
average lif~span, he found that they didn't increase 
the maximum lifespan. He concluded that 3 
supplemented antioxidants couldn't penetrate to 
the mitochondrial matrix, and that free radicals 
produced there damaged the mitochondrial DNA, 
resulting in metabolic errors that increased the 
rate of free radical production, leading to a 
constant acceleration of the rate of decline. 
This statement of the "rate of living" in terms 
of damage to the genes of somatic cells appealed 
to mainstream biologists, who were just learning 
about the new DNA double-helix model of the 
gene, and who were already committed to the 
"wear and tear" theory of aging and cancer, 
involving random "somatic mutations," which 
were thought to be caused mostly by radiation. An 
extrinsic cause of age-associated diseases, ioniz­
ing radiation, had been replaced by an intrinsic, 
inescapable cause, mitochondrial respiration. 
By 2006, at the age of 90, Harman seemed to 
be fully convinced that mitochondrial deteriora­
tion was unavoidable, an "inborn· aging process 
(lAP)." Since his original theory proposed toxic 
free radicals as the cause of cancer as well as 
aging, the "lAP" would suggest that cancer too is 
ultimately the result of an inborn tendency, though 
he had found that antioxidants could reduce the 
cancer death rate in animals. His experiments in 
the 1960s and '70s contributed to the use of 
vitamin E and vitamin C, and to the development 
of increased optimism about the possibility of 
radically extending the maximum lifespan. 
For example (1961), he found that the most 
highly unsaturated fats were the most carcino­
ge~ic, and (1976) he showed that peroxidation 
damages brain function, increasing learning 
errors. DHA, the most peroxidizable of the fatty 
acids, accumulates in the brain with age, and 
peroxidation corresponds to reduced function 
(1977). In 1989, he observed that the age pigment, 
lipofuscin, "is increased by vitamin E deficiency 
and by increased intake of polyunsaturated fatty 
acids." Unfortunately, he saw those facts as mere 
epiphenomena to the "inborn aging process." His 
view of science excluded a creative/damaging role 
for the environment. 
Free radicals do cause the kinds of damage 
that Hannan described, but those reactions don't 
necessarily follow from the free radical processes 
that are intrinsic to life energy production. The 
harmful reactions are consequences of interference with the intrinsic mitochondrial 
reactions, so they illustrate the opposite of the 
"rate of living" theory: A higher, less impeded, 
rate of living results in a lower rate of aging 
(Speakman, et al., 2004; Speakman, 2005). 
Harman's work with free radicals in petroleum 
chemistry had convinced him that their reactions 
were always random, and, following established 
assumptions about the nature of cells, he neglected 
to consider that reactive unpaired electrons might 
have a constructive, non-random, role in cell 
metabolism. 
The recent recognition of a constructive 
biological role for unpaired electrons provides an 
opportunity for a return to the exploratory 
approach to science that W .F. Koch, W arburg, and 
Szent-Gyorgyi exemplified. In the paradigm of 
mainstream authoritarian biology, organisms are 
products of their inherited relatively timeless 
components, the genes. In the newer developing 
paradigm, organisms use their inherited resources 
creatively, modifying themselves to optimize their 
use of the environment as well as modifying the 
environment to meet their needs. 
Most medical publications seek to confirm the 
old paradigm, even when they are dealing with 
fundamentally unsolved problems such as cancer, 
dementia, and aging itself. The new paradigm sees 
the organism's contacts with the environment as 
the focus of attention, and with experience as the 
subject matter, a radical empiricism tends to 
replace argument from the authority of "well 
established assumptions." 
For organisms capable of intense oxidative 
metabolism, the daily cycle of light and dark, and 
longer cycles of changes of food supply, are 
stresses that can be handled by adjusting the 
metabolic rate, in sleep, torpor, hibernation or 
estivation. Early in life, there is a great difference 
in oxygen consumption between day and night, but 
in old age there is less difference, with decreased 
daytime oxygen consumption, and a decrease in 
both the amount and the depth of sleep. This corre­
sponds to the increasing amount of polyunsatu­
rated fat in the brain, especially the n-3 DHA. 
Newborn babies are said to often be "deficient 
in essential fatty acids," and they spend most of 
their time sleeping. When animals are fed a diet 4 
lacking the so-called "essential fatty acids" their 
oxygen consumption is very high, representing a 
retention of a more juvenile physiology, and their 
sleep is deeper, with a longer duration of slow 
wave sleep (Dzoljic, 1978). This is the phase of 
sleep in which the brain restores itself, and it's the 
phase that is decreased in aging. Prostaglandins, 
produced from polyunsaturated fats, produce 
increased wakefulness (Takemiya, 2011). 
When the amount of DHA in women's blood 
was compared to their babies' sleep behavior in 
their first two days, the "infants in the high-DHA 
group had significantly less sleep-wake transition 
and more wakefulness than did infants in the 
low-DHA group," and this was interpreted to 
mean that "more wakefulness in the infants in the 
high-DHA group also reflects greater maturity" 
(Cheruku, et al., 2002). In newborns, a mature 
sleep pattern is probably not a good sign. Several 
studies have reported an association between 
higher maternal DHA and increased allergies in 
the children (Gonzalez-Gil, 2016). 
Another ubiquitous stressor is bacterial 
endotoxin, and young organisms have multiple 
protective adaptations to it; with advancing age, 
its effects become more dangerous. As the polyun­
saturated fats accumulate, the activation of cyclo­
oxygenase (prostaglandin synthase) by endotoxin 
produces progressively larger inflammatory 
effects. Endotoxin, amplified by the prosta­
glandins, promotes the degenerative processes (for 
example, Griffm, et al., 2013) in cancer, stroke, 
dementia, heart and kidney failure, and 
sarcopenia, the age-related loss of muscle. Inhibit­
ing the conversion of polyunsaturated fats to 
prostaglandins, for example by aspirin, protects 
against those degenerative processes (for example, 
Trappe, et al., 2001 ). 
The success of an organism's adaptive interac­
tions can be seen in the maintenance of a stable 
balance of reductive and oxidative processes. 
Mere size is a stabilizing factor; a quickly respon­
sive nervous system is another factor. From birth 
to old age, our rate of metabolism decreases 
progressively. Up to about the age of 12, the rate 
of mortality decreases, as our mass increases 
along with the maturation of structures. After 
puberty, the mortality rate increases as our 
metabolism, nerve function, and other adaptive processes slow. A decrease of the rate of oxidative 
metabolism leads to increased lipid peroxidation 
(Brand, 2000; Salin, et al., 2015; Schaar, et al., 
2013; Sanz, 2016). 
There is now an abundance of knowledge 
about the factors that retard metabolism and 
adaptation, but biomedical research has been 
directed away from an integral understanding of 
the nature of life, and from holistic metabolic 
interpretations of cancer and the other diseases of 
aging, by powerful interests with ulterior motives. 
At the time that Denham Harman shifted his 
interest from insecticides to medicine, the idea that 
polyunsaturated fats were nutritionally essential 
and beneficial was being widely advertised. If they 
were essential for life, then their oxidative instabil­
ity, leading to the production of toxic lipid peroxi­
dation products, was an unavoidable fact of life, 
seeming to confirm the rate of living theory of 
aging. The ideology of the seed oil industry was 
designed to mesh with the needs of other 
industries. 
It's now well established that the tissue content 
of polyunsaturated fatty acids is strongly influ­
enced by diet, and that reducing their intake, or 
increasing the intake of saturated fats (Nanji, et al., 
2001; Bronnikov, et al., 2010), can have beneficial 
effects in the degenerative and inflammatory 
diseases. Unfortunately, there's no trillion dollar 
industry, or even a single government agency, 
devoted to building on that information. 
REFERENCES 
Nat Rev Cancer. 2016 Jul 29. From Krebs to 
clinic: glutamine metabolism to cancer therapy. 
Altman BJ, Stine ZE, Dang CV. 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 
Jan;294(1):G27-38. A new model for nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis in the rat utilizing total enteral nutri­
tion to overfeed a high-polyunsaturated fat diet. 
Baumgardner JN(l), Shankar K, Hennings L, Badger 
TM, Ronis MJ. 
Exp Gerontol. 2000 Sep;35(6-7):811-20. Uncou­
pling to survive? The role of mitochondrial ineffi­
ciency in ageing. Brand MD. 
Biochemistry (Mosc). 2010 Dec; 75(12):1491-7. 
Dietary supplementation of old rats with hydrogen­
ated peanut oil restores activities of mitochondrial 
respiratory complexes in skeletal muscles. Bronnikov 
GE, Kulagina TP, Aripovsky AV. 5 
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 298: E354-E361, 
2010. Effect of a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor on 
postexercise muscle protein synthesis in humans. 
Burd NA, Dickinson JM, Lemoine JK, Carroll CC, 
Sullivan BE, Haus JM, Jemiolo B, Trappe SW, Hughes 
GM, Sanders CE, Jr, Trappe TA. 
Am J Clin Nutr. 2002 Sep;76(3):608-13. Higher 
maternal plasma docosahexaenoic acid during 
pregnancy is associated with more mature neonatal 
sleep-state patterning. Cheruku SR, Montgomery­
Downs HE, Farkas SL, Thoman EB, Lammi-Keefe CJ. 
Genes Dev. 2012 May 1;26(9):877-90. Links 
between metabolism and cancer. Dang CV. 
Prostaglandins. 1978 Feb;15(2):317-24. Prosta­
glandins and sleep. Awaking effect of prosta­
glandins and sleep pattern of essential fatty acids 
deficient (EFAD) rats. Dzoljic MR. 
Eur J Clin Nutr. 2016 Jul;70(7):819-23. 
Whole-blood fatty acids and inflammation in 
European children: the IDEFICS Study. 
Gonzalez-Gil EM, Santabarbara J, Siani A, 
Ahrens W, Sioen I, Eiben G, GUnther K, 
Iacoviello L, Molnar D, Rise P, Russo P, Tomari­
tis M, Veidebaum T, Galli C, Moreno LA. 
J Gerontol A Bioi Sci Med Sci. 2015 Nov; 
70(11 ): 1334-42. Reconsidering the Role of 
Mitochondria in Aging. Gonzalez-Freire M, de 
Cabo R, Bernier M, Sollott SJ, Fabbri E, Navas P, 
Ferrucci L. 
J Neurosci. 2013 Sep 18;33(38):15248-58. 
Cyclooxygenase-1-dependent prostaglandins 
mediate susceptibility to systemic 
inflammation-induced acute cognitive dysfunc­
tion. Griffin EW, Skelly DT, Murray CL, 
Cunningham C. 
J Gerontol. 1956 Jul;ll(3):298-300. Aging: a 
theory based on free radical and radiation 
chemistry. Harman D. 
J Gerontol. 1957 Apr;12(2):199-202. Athero­
sclerosis: a hypothesis concerning the initiating 
steps in pathogenesis. Harman D. 
Lancet. 1961 Jan 28;1(7170):200-1. Mutation, 
cancer, and ageing. Harman D. 
Radiation Research: May 1962, Vol. 16, No. 
5, pp. 753-763. Role of Free Radicals in 
Mutation, Cancer, Aging, and the Maintenance 
of Life. Harman D. 
J Gerontol. 1961 Jul;16:247-54. Prolongation 
of the normal lifespan and inhibition of sponta­
neous cancer by antioxidants. Harman D. J Gerontol. 1971 Oct;26(4):451-7. Free 
radical theory of aging: effect of the amount and 
degree of unsaturation of dietary fat on mortal­
ity rate. Harman D. 
JAm Geriatr Soc. 1972 Apr;20(4):145-7. The 
biologic clock: the mitochondria? Harman D. 
J Gerontol. 1975 Nov;30(6):647-54. Rat brain 
fatty acid composition: effect of dietary fat and 
age. Eddy DE, Harman D. 
JAm Geriatr Soc. 1976 Jul;24(7):301-7. Free 
radical theory of aging: effect of dietary fat on 
central nervous system function. Harman D, 
Hendricks S, Eddy DE, Seibold J. 
JAm Geriatr Soc. 1977 May;25(5):220-9. Free 
radical theory of aging: effect of age, sex and 
dietary precursors on rat-brain docosahexanoic 
acid. Eddy DE, Harman D. "Increasing the peroxi­
dizability of dietary fat has an adverse effect on the 
function of the central nervous system (CNS) in 
the rat." 
Adv Exp Med Bioi. 1989;266:3-15. Lipofuscin 
and ceroid formation: the cellular recycling 
system. Harman D 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jun-Jul; 
1847(6-7):514-25. Increased reactive oxygen 
species production during reductive stress: The 
roles of mitochondrial glutathione and thiore­
doxin reductases. Korge P, Calmettes G, Weiss 
JN. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2001 
Nov;299(2):638-44. Dietary saturated fatty acids 
reverse inflammatory and fibrotic changes in 
rat liver despite continued ethanol administra­
tion. Nanji AA, Jokelainen K, Tipoe GL, Rahem­
tulla A, Dannenberg AJ. 
Bioi Lett. 2015 Sep;11(9):20150538. Individu­
als with higher metabolic rates have lower 
levels of reactive oxygen species in vivo. Salin K, 
Auer SK, Rudolf AM, Anderson GJ, Cairns AG, 
Mullen W, Hartley RC, Selman C, Metcalfe NB. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Aug; 
1857(8): 1116-26. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen 
species: Do they extend or shorten animal 
lifespan? Sanz A. 
PLoS Genet. 2015 Feb 11;11(2):e1004972. 
Mitochondrial and cytoplasmic ROS have 
opposing effects on lifespan. Schaar CE, Dues DJ, 6 
Spielbauer KK, Machiela E, Cooper JF, Senchuk 
M, Hekimi S, Van Raamsdonk JM. 
Neuroscience. 2012 Jan 27;202:326-33. 
Effects of diet and behavioral enrichment on 
free fatty acids in the aged canine brain. 
Snigdha S, Astarita G, Piomelli D, Cotman CW. 
J Exp Bioi. 2005 May;208(Pt 9):1717-30. 
Body size, energy metabolism and lifespan. 
Speakman JR. 
Aging Cell. 2004 Jun;3(3):87-95. Uncoupled 
and surviving: individual mice with high 
metabolism have greater mitochondrial uncou­
pling and live longer. Speakman JR, Talbot DA, 
Selman C, Snart S, McLaren JS, Redman P, Krol 
E, Jackson DM, Johnson MS, Brand MD. 
Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 
Nov-Dec;48(6):609-19. Stress eating and tuning 
out: cancer cells re-wire metabolism to counter 
stress. Stine ZE, Dang CV. 
Neurochem Int. 2011 Nov;59(6):922-4. 
Prostaglandin E2 produced by microsomal 
prostaglandin E synthase-1 regulates the onset 
and the maintenance of wakefulness. Takemiya 
T 
Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 300: 
R655-R662, 2011. Influence of acetaminophen 
and ibuprofen on skeletal muscle adaptations to 
resistance exercise in older adults. Trappe T A, 
Carroll CC, Dickinson J~, LeMoine JK, Haus 
JM, Sullivan BE, Lee JD, Jemiolo B, Weinheimer . 
EM, Hollon CJ. 
Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol304: 
R198-R205, 2013. Prostaglandin and myokine 
involvement in the cyclooxygenase-inhibiting 
drug enhancement of skeletal muscle adapta­
tions to resistance exercise in older adults. 
Trappe TA, Standley RA, Jemiolo B, Carroll CC, 
Trappe SW. 
Front Physiol. 2013 Jul 17;4:185. Membrane 
potential and cancer progression. Yang M, 
Brackenbury WJ. 
Mech Ageing Dev 16: 345-353, 1981. Aging: 
effects on the prostaglandin production by 
skeletal muscle of male rhesus monkeys 
(Macaca mulatta). Young MK, Bocek RM, 
Herrington PT, Beatty CH. 
********************** 