Estrogen, iron, degenerative
aging, and progesterone
On average, women’s hemoglobin and
hematocrit are both about 12% lower thanmen’s, with little change in the ratio withaging. This difference has been ascribed to theloss of blood by menstruation, despite the factthat female animals generally (the great major-ity of which don’t menstruate) also have alower hemoglobin level than males. There issome evidence that estrogen slightlysuppresses the formation of erythropoietin, theregulator of red blood cell formation, but mostevidence indicates that it is estrogen’s suppres-sion of the bone marrow itself that accounts for
most of the difference. Some evidenceindicates that water retention caused by estro-gen is responsible for the blood dilution (Ueda,et al., 1986).
Estrogen increases the stiffness of red
blood cells and the viscosity of plasma(Solerte, et al., 1991), but women’s wholeblood is less viscous than men’s (Kameneva, etal., 1999). This improved flowability of theblood, maintaining ad equate oxygenation of
tissues, results from the lower concentration ofred cells.
For many years, this relative anemia of
women led doctors to prescribe iron supple-ments for the correction of “iron deficiencyanemia,” with no indication of an irondeficiency other than low hemoglobin and lowhematocrit. That practice has had various
harmful consequences. Those consequences of
consuming more iron than is needed havenever been adequately explored.
While osteoporosis and
dementia involve iron overload,they are associated with an
increased likelihood of anemia .
While estrogen decreases the formation of
blood, it increases the assimilation of ironfrom the diet, so that when a woman’s estro-gen is high her extraction of iron from food isseveral times as high as a man’s. Thisincreased affinity for iron can compensate fora greater need for iron resulting frommenstrual blood loss and pregnancy, but it canalso lead to the accumulation of toxic amountsof iron in the body if the diet supplies morethan is needed. Both men and women accumu-late iron with aging, and after menopausetissue iron increases more rapidly in women. 
It has been known for a long time that
calcium deposits in tissues such as arteries aremixed with iron (Peltomaa, et al., 1992;Langheinrich, et al., 2009), but there has beensurprisingly little work to understand thereason for the association. In the 1960s, HansSelye did a series of experiments in which acombination of injected iron salts and localtissue irritation caused deposition of calciumRay Peat's Newsletter
Resist much, obey little. … Walt Whitman
Copyright 2021            Raymond Peat  P.O. Box 5764  Eugene O R  97405                July 2021
Not for republication without written permission.in the irritated tissue, producing a scleroderma-
like condition. If he treated the animals withvitamin E at the same time, the tissue didn’tcalcify. Vitamin E protects polyunsaturatedfats from oxidation by iron, so the implicationwas that lipid peroxidation catalyzed by iron,triggered by slight stre sses, was responsible for
the tissue calcification.
Four day exposure of rats to
hypoxia (10% O(2)) increased thelevel of lipofuscin-like pigments inerythrocytes up to 9 fold. Thisincrease was completely preventedwhen the animals were exposed tohypercapnia (4.3% CO(2)) inaddition to hypoxia.  
                           Skoumalová, et al.
Until the 1960s, a paralytic disease occurring
in some western Pacific Ocean islands,“amyotrophical lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism-dementia complex,” was believed to be causedby heredity, and then it was thought to becaused by a virus transmitted by cannibalism,later by aluminum poisoning, and then bypoison from a toxin in blue-green algae. Start-ing in 1976, a series of studies found that all ofthe affected areas, from western New Guineato southern Japan, with  a variety of cultural
practices and diets, had in common a nutri-tional deficiency of calcium, because of thewater and soil in the region. Their soils alsocontained a high level of aluminum.
When calcium is deficient, secretion of
parathyroid hormone i ncreases, removing
calcium from bones to meet the regulatoryneeds of the rest of the body. This involvessuppressing oxidative metabolism thatproduces CO2, and partially replacing it withglycolytic metabolism, producing lactic acid.When lactic acid is formed by a cell, theinterior of the cell b ecomes more alkaline,causing the structural proteins to be more
negatively charged. This can lead to anincrease of positively charged metal ionsinside cells. When metals other than calcium,such as aluminum, iron, or lead, are abundantin food and water, these will be accumulatedin cells along with calcium, where theywill—in proportion to the unsaturation of thecell’s lipids—accelerate the processes of lipidperoxidation. The type o f degenerative disease
a person develops will depend partly on thetypes of metal and fat that accumulate in thetissues.
Women, under the effects of estrogen,
accumulate (and synthesize) more of theextremely unsaturated fatty acids, such asDHA, than men do (Giltay, et al., 2004). 
At birth, the brain contains a considerable
amount of highly unsaturated fats, mainly ofthe omega-9 series, which our bodies cansynthesize from sugar or saturated fats. Theplacenta normally functions as a barrieragainst highly unsaturated fatty acids fromfoods. The fats in the mother’s diet enter hermilk, with the result that the less stableomega-6 and omega-3 fats begin to accumu-late in the breast-fed baby’s tissues, especially
the brain ; if it receives a formula “enriched”
with iron and DHA, the process is likely to beaccelerated. Steady growth during childhooddilutes these environmental factors, but asgrowth slows their concentration increases.The result is an increasing tendency toproduce lipid peroxides, that damage proteinsand nucleic acids, caus ing progressive loss of
function and increased calcification. 
The presence of free, unbound iron in the
tissues or in baby formula will degradevitamin E, increasing the peroxidation ofpolyunsaturated fats. There are situations inwhich iron supplementation, without adequatevitamin E, can increase premature birth,increase the risk of hemolytic anemia in thenewborn, and increase the risk of retinal
2damage (Johnson, et al ., 1982; Henderson and
Torch, 1976; Casanueva and Viteri, 2003).
Some of the products of lipid peroxidation,
interacting with iron and other cell materials,become the very complexly structured agepigment, lipofuscin. Among the substances inthese dark granules are some heme molecules,protected against elimination, which cancatalyze the conversion of oxygen to water,without producing usable  energy; the pigment
becomes a drain on fuel and oxygen, creating aconstant reductive, oxygen deficient, stress.This tendency to redu ce oxygen contributes to
the formation of vicious circles, inducinghypoxia inducible factor, HIF, which is acrucial factor in promoting iron absorption,and which activates many potentially danger-ous enzymes, including heme oxygenase, HO,which turns heme groups into free iron, carbonmonoxide, and bilirubin. HIF also activatesaromatase, increasing estrogen (Samarajeewa,et al., 2013).
About 60% of newborn babies are
jaundiced for a few days, showing that thestress of being born has activated their HO,turning heme into its toxic components. Thepresence of free bilirubin is known to beassociated with lipid peroxidation and DNAdamage (Basu, et al. 2014). Better prenatalconditions would probably reduce theincidence of neonatal jaundice and stress, andthis might involve avoida nce of highly unsatu-
rated fats and large iron supplements, andavoiding stressful medical procedures.
Stresses that increase exposure to excess
iron and PUFA can shorten the life span of redblood cells, adding to the burden of heme andlipid peroxides. The well known association ofthe autoimmune diseases with excessive estro-gen probably involves the increases ofhypoxia, HIF, HO, iron, and PUFA under theinfluence of estrogen. Aldehydes produced bythe breakdown of fats react with cell proteins,making them antigenic, while episodes ofhypoxia and hypoglycemia make the immune
system more reactive.
All microorganisms require iron to grow,
so limiting the availability of iron will limittheir ability to be infective. Our respiratoryand digestive membranes secrete two proteins,lactoferrin and transferrin, which have a veryhigh affinity for iron atoms, as well as othergermicidal properties, and provide a firstdefense against infection. Milk contains theseproteins, which provide anti-infective protec-tion for the baby, while l etting it safely assimi-
late iron by delivering it directly to proteins on
the surface of the intestine that bind it. Sincecancer cells’ growth is stimulated by iron, thecirculation of these i ron-binding proteins in
the blood and body fluids probably forms partof our defense against metastasis.
Another type of anti-microbial peptide (the
cathelicidins and hepcidin) is able to killviruses and bacteria directly, without bindingiron. Hepcidin was discovered in the urine,and it’s important for preventing bladderinfections. Synthesis of the cathelicidins isdependent on vitamin D. 
One of the ways in which estrogen
increases iron retention is by inhibiting theformation of hepcidin (Balbouj, et al., 2018),since one of hepcidin’s main functions is tolimit the absorption of i ron from the intestine,
and to inhibit its release into the bloodstream.Progesterone increases the synthesis ofhepcidin (Xiang, et al., 2016). 
At the beginning of menopause, ovarian
production of progester one is suddenly inter-
rupted, while the production of estrogen in fat,skin, muscles, and other tissues increases.Following menopause, the bones as well asthe brain accumulate iron, and the effectsinclude a much higher risk of osteoporosis andAlzheimer’s disease in women than in men.While osteoporosis and dementia involve ironoverload, they are associated with an
increased likelihood of anemia.  
3The increase of tissue iron in aging is a
factor in the greater susceptibility to infection.Iron not only supports the  growth of infective
organisms, but increases the formation ofinflammatory cytokines and weakens thebarrier function of the intestine, contributing toendotoxemia (Visitchanakun, et al., 2020).These factors are involved in the corona virussickness, and iron overl oad is increasingly
recognized as a factor in susceptibility to thatinfection and in its main characteristics,extreme inflammation, the cytokine storm, andhyper-coagulability. Removal of the iron bychelation has been proposed to reduce theinflammation and coagulation (Vlahakos, etal., 2021; Perricone, et al., 2020; Edeas, et al.,2020; Nielsen and Pretorius, 2020).Commonly used chelators can move harmfulmetals from the bones, where they wereinactive, into the brain and kidneys; somechelators taken orally can move metals fromthe intestine into the m itochondria. Lactoferrin,
currently being tested, seems to be safer, andbesides reducing free iron it is antiinflamma-tory, reducing iron absorption, while blockingviral infection in multiple ways (Habib, et al.,2021; Campione, et al., 2021).
The long history of prescribing iron pills to
women, regardless of their diet, has created aculture that has little interest in considering theharmful effects of excess iron. That attitudeexists within the fraudulent “science” traditioncreated and sustained in the last 80 years bythe estrogen industry that, to create a marketfor their product, has identified menopause andold age as a time of estrogen deficiency. 
The fact that unopposed estrogen contrib-
utes to a toxic accumulation of iron, andpromotes the retention of highly unsaturated
fats (forming lipofuscin)  in the brain and other
organs, degrading imm unity, brain function,
and bone strength, gives us numerous opportu-nities to intervene to remedy and to preventsome serious health problems, including thosethat have been thought to be inevitable conse-
quences of aging. 
When we act to correct one part of this
interlocking system, we are usually improvingother things as well. For example, estrogen’seffect on hepcidin that increases iron can bereversed by increased progesterone, with itsopposite effect on hepcidin (Xiang, et al.,2016), while estrogen’s effect on intracellularcalcium is also reversed by progesterone(Luoma, et al., 2012; Xu, et al., 2005; Zhang,et al., 2002).
Besides progesterone, two other steroids
cause an increase of hepcidin—epitiostanol,an anti-estrogen used to treat breast cancer,and mifepristone, which antagonizes cortisolas well as estrogen and progesterone. Theimportance of non-toxic substances to loweriron is widely recognized: “Small moleculescapable of inducing hepcidin could also be ofgreat therapeutic benefit to patients withhemochromatosis or other disorders compli-cated by iron overload, such as β-thalassemia.Unfortunately, there has been limited progressin identifying small molecules that increasehepcidin biosynthesis” (Xiang, et al., 2016). 
Oxidative metabolism is the basic factor in
resisting the degenerative processes; forexample, the CO2 that the mitochondriaproduce prevents iron toxicity in a variety ofways. It inhibits the formation of lactic acid,eliminating that cause of iron and calciumdeposition in cells, and it acts directly on ironto make it less toxic; for example it stabilizeslysosomes (Gerby, et al., 2019), and reducesthe activity of free radicals produced by lipidperoxidation, reducing fo rmation of lipofuscin
(Skoumalová, et al., 2008). One of its effectsis probably by stabilizing transferrin, increas-ing its affinity for iron: “It was found thathypercapnia in vivo protects against thedamaging effects of ischemia or hypoxia.Several mechanisms have been suggested toexplain the protective role of CO2 in vivo.The most significant appears to be
4stabilization of the iron-transferrin complex
which prevents the involvement of iron ions inthe initiation of free radical reactions” (Veselá& Wilhelm, 2002).
Because of the close interaction between
iron and calcium, vitamin D and adequatecalcium in the diet are important for protectionagainst chronic iron overload (Esparragoza, etal., 2020; Lee, et al., 2021). In general, avoid-ing foods with added ir on is good, and having
coffee or tea with naturally iron rich foods isprotective for most people. Even duringpregnancy, slightly low hemoglobin isn’tenough to justify using an ironsupplement—slightly low hemoglobin isprotective against infections and stress. Verylow serum ferritin and transferrin saturation arereasonable indicators of low tissue iron stores.
REFERENCES
Free Radic Biol Med. 2018 May
20;120:317-329. Brain mitochondrial iron
accumulates in Huntington's disease, mediates
mitochondrial dysfunction, and can be removedpharmacologically. Sonal Agrawal, Julia Fox,
Baskaran Thyagarajan, Jonathan H Fox. 
Exp Clin Endocrinol  Diabetes. 2018
Jul;126(7):453-459. Elevated Levels of Estrogen
Suppress Hepcidin Synthesis and Enhance
Serum Iron Availability in PremenopausalWomen. Khuloud Bajbouj, Jasmin Shafarin, Hilda
Allam, Mohamed Madkour , Samir Awadallah,
Ahmed El-Serafy, Divyasree Sandeep, MawiehHamad.  
J Perinatol. 2014 Jul;34(7):519-23. Lipid
peroxidation, DNA damage and total antioxi-
dant status in neonatal hyperbilirubinemia. S
Basu, D De, H Dev Khanna, A Kumar. 
Front Pharmacol. 2021 Jun 17;12:666600.
Lactoferrin Against SARS-CoV-2: In Vitro and
In Silico Evidences. Elena Campione, and 30
co-authors.
J Nutr. 2003 May;133(5 Suppl 2):1700S-1708S.
Iron and oxidative stress in pregnancy. Esther
Casanueva, Fernando E Viteri.
Proc Nutr Soc. 2008 Feb;67(1):19-27. Gender
differences in the n-3 fatty acid content oftissues. Childs CE, Romeu-Nadal M, Burdge GC,
Calder PC.
Int J Infect Dis. 2020 Aug;97:303-305.  I r o n :
Innocent bystander or vicious culprit in
COVID-19 pathogenesis? Marvin Edeas, Jumana
Saleh, Carole Peyssonnaux.
Nefrologia (Engl Ed). Mar-Apr
2020;40(2):209-210. The association of iron
overload and development of calciphylaxis.
[Article in English, Spa nish] Jessy Korina Peña
Esparragoza, María Pérez Fernández, PatriciaMartínez Miguel, Hanane Bouarich.
Nefrologia (Engl Ed). Mar-Apr
2020;40(2):209-210. The association of iron
overload and development of calciphylaxis.
[Article in English, Spa nish] Jessy Korina Peña
Esparragoza, María Pérez Fernández, PatriciaMartínez Miguel, Hanane Bouarich.
Cytotherapy. 2019 Apr;21(4):460-467.
Hypoxia/hypercapnia prevents iron-dependent
cold injuries in cord bl ood stem and progenitor
cells. Sandie Gerby, Mathias Simplicien, Pascale
Duchez, Jean Chevaleyre, Zoran Ivanovic, MarijaVlaski-Lafarge.  
Am J Clin Nutr. 2004 Nov;80(5):1167-74.
Docosahexaenoic acid co ncentrations are higher
in women than in men because of estrogeniceffects.  Giltay EJ, Gooren LJ, Toorians AW, Katan
MB, Zock PL.
Biomed Pharmacother. 2021 Apr;136:111228.
The role of iron in the pathogenesis of
COVID-19 and possible treatment with lacto-ferrin and other iron chelators.  Hosam M Habib,
Sahar Ibrahim, Aamnah Zaim, Wissam H Ibrahim. 
Med Hypotheses. 2013 Dec;81(6):1130-4.
Estrogen-dependent changes in serum iron
levels as a translator of the adverse effects ofestrogen during infection: a conceptual frame-work. Mawieh Hamad, Samir Awadallah. 
South Med J. 1976 Sep;69(9):1237-8. Vitamin
E-dependent anemia in a premature infant. K C
Henderson, E Torch.
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1982;393:473-95. Vitamin
E supplementation and the retinopathy of
prematurity. L Johnson, D Schaffer, G Quinn, D
Goldstein, M J Mathis, C Otis, T R Boggs Jr.
Clin Hemorheol Microcirc.
1999;21(3-4):357-63. Gender difference in
rheologic properties of blood and risk of5cardiovascular diseases. M V Kameneva, M J
Watach, H S Borovetz.
J Comput Assist Tomogr. Jul-Aug
2009;33(4):517-22. Role of computed tomogra-
phy voxel size in detection and discrimination of
calcium and iron deposits in atherosclerotichuman coronary artery specimens. Alexander C
Langheinrich, Marian Kampschulte, ChristineCrössmann, Regina Moritz, Wigbert S Rau, RainerM Bohle, Erik L Ritman.
Mol Nutr Food Res. 2021 Feb;65(4):e2000772.
Vitamin D Rescues Pancreatic â Cell Dysfunc-
tion due to Iron Overload via Elevation of theVitamin D Receptor and Maintenance of Ca 2+Homeostasis. Yoo Jeong Lee, Gyu Hee Kim, Sang
Ick Park, Joo Hyun Lim.
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1980 Aug
1;137(7):840-2. Increased blood viscosity in
young women using oral contraceptives. G D
Lowe, M M Drummond, C D Forbes, J C Barbenel.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012
Aug;131(1-2):30-6. Progesterone inhibition of
neuronal calcium signaling underlies aspects of
progesterone-mediated neuroprotection.  Jessie I
Luoma, Christopher M Stern, Paul G Mermelstein.
Psychoneuroendocri nology. 2008 Nov 27.
Gender differences in rat erythrocyte and brain
docosahexaenoic acid composition: Role ofovarian hormones and dietary omega-3 fattyacid composition. McNamara RK, Able J,
Jandacek R, Rider T, Tso P.
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2014
Dec;25(8):845-50. Iron-enhanced coagulation is
attenuated by chelation: thrombelastographic
and ultrastructural analysis. Vance G Nielsen,
Etheresia Pretorius.
Biol Trace Elem Res. 1992 Sep;34(3):249-55.
Proton-induced X-ray emission analysis of
atherosclerotic plaques of the carotidbifurcation. M Peltomaa, K Mattila, J Wolf, M
Hyvönen-Dabek.
Immunol Res. 2020 Aug;68(4):213-224.
COVID-19 as part of the hyperferritinemic
syndromes: the role of iron depletion therapy.
Carlo Perricone, Elena Bartoloni, Roberto Bursi,
Giacomo Cafaro, Giacomo Maria Guidelli, YehudaShoenfeld, Roberto Gerli.    
Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 8;15(2):R30.
HIF-1á stimulates aromatase expression driven
by prostaglandin E2 in breast adipose stroma.Nirukshi U Samarajeewa, Fangyuan Yang, Maria
M Docanto, Minako Sakurai, Keely M McNamara,Hironobu Sasano, Stephe n B Fox, Evan R
Simpson, Kristy A Brown. 
Cell Biochem Funct. 2008 Oct;26(7):801-7.
Hypercapnia protects erythrocytes against free
radical damage induced by hypoxia in exposedrats. Alice Skoumalová, Jan Herget, Jirí Wilhelm.
Rev Fr Gynecol Obstet. 1991 Feb 25;86(2 Pt
2):139-42. [Influence of sex hormones on hemor-
rheology and plasma proteins during the
menstrual cycle]. [Article in French] Solerte SB,
Fioravanti M, Magri F, Spinillo A, Guaschino S,Ferrari E.
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1986
Jul;155(1):195-201. Estrogen effects on plasma
volume, arterial blood pressure, interstitial
space, plasma proteins, and blood viscosity insheep. S Ueda, V Fortune, B S Bull, G J
Valenzuela, L D Longo.   
Physiol Res. 2002;51(4):335-9. The role of
carbon dioxide in free radical reactions of the
organism. A Veselá, J Wilhelm.
Artif Organs. 2021 Feb;45(2):163-167. H yper-
ferritinemia in patients with COVID-19: An
opportunity for iron chelation? Vassilios D
Vlahakos, Katerina P Marathias, Nikolaos Arkado-poulos, Demetrios V Vlahakos.  
Quant Imaging Med Surg. 2021
Jul;11(7):2893-2904. Gender-specific liver aging
and magnetic resonance imaging. Yì Xiáng J
Wáng.
Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. 2005
Sep;27(7):475-82. Effect of progesterone on
calcium activated potassium currents and intra-
cellular calcium in guinea pig colon myocytes.  L
Xu, J Chen, B Yu, W Dong, K Chen, H Luo, YZhu.
J Pharm Pharmacol. 2002 Dec;54(12):1667-74.
Rapid inhibition of the contraction of rat tail
artery by progesterone is mediated by inhibition
of calcium currents. Zhang M, Benishin CG,
Pang PK.6