 
Ry Peat's Newsletter
 Not for republication without written permission. Raymond Peat, PO Box 5764, Eugene OR 97405 January 2001 Fibrosis is an outstanding feature of aging: Skin, joints, liver, kidneys, heart and blood vessels, even the brain, undergo fibrotic changes in association with disease, injury, and aging. I Excitotoxins are fibrogenic Estrogen is excitotoxic and fibrogenic Lactate is fibrogenic Edema precedes fibrosis Injury and inflammation are fibrogenic Free radical peroxidation is a common pathway leading to fibrosis, as in cirrhosis of the liver in which unsaturated fats and free radicals have central roles. Saturated fats, antihistamines, thyroid hormone, and other antiinflammatory agents prevent or reverse fibrosis. The fibrous extracellular material regulates specialized cellular functioning, and is a protective buffer. Fibrogenesis carcinogenesis. Cancerization is a "field process," not primarily a unique "genetic event." Proteolytic enzymes continuously dissolve and remodel the extracellular matrix. Unsaturated fats inhibit proteolytic enzymes. The resistance of the fibrin in blood clots to enzymic dissolution is increased by usaturated fats. Antifibromatogenic hormones oppose the development of the fibromas and cancers that are caused by estrogen. The first principle in reversal is to stop the pathogenic process, and to stop the stress- induced cell death. Then restorative processes can come into balance with degenerative. FIBROSIS: Estrogen, stiffness, excitotoxicity, aging--a problem more general than 
"collagen disease"
 Thirty years ago, my professors said that any publication more than ten years old wasn't worth reading; that was apparently why I never saw the professors in the library. In a span of ten years, a change of 45 degrees in scientific orientation is thought to be progress. But in 40 years, those changes of orientation can produce a turn of 180 degrees, in which things that once seemed to be firmly established and full of potential have simply been removed from the academic canon. The biology of fibrosis is one of those important things that came to be neglected even while massive amounts of new evidence were confirming the old views. At the beginning of the 20th century, Eli Metchnikov argued that changes in the connective tissues were the cause of aging. He also argued that intestinal toxins were important causes of the aging changes. Eariy in the century, x-rays were found to produce tissue burns. The early effect of a radiation burn is inflammation and edema. The edema gradually gives way to fibrosis, and if the person lives long enough, the fibrotic tissue may calcify. In the 1930s, Leo Loeb found that large doses of estrogen stimulated massive synthesis of collagen in the uterus.and vagina, and noticed that these effects resembled the increased accumulation of collagen that occurs with aging. In the 1940s, Alexander Lipshutz showed that very small, but continuous, doses of estrogen caused fibromas to develop in many tissues besides the uterus, and that these fibromas tended to develop.  into cancers. Later, estrogen was found to accelerate the stiffening of the collagenous tissues that normally occurs with aging. In the 1930s, the Shutes, father and sons, found that the clotting-associated diseases of V pregnancy were prevented by vitamin E, and they proposed that vitamin E acts as an antiestrogen, protecting against the increased clotting problems caused by excessive estrogen. They showed that 7 vitamin E activates the proteolytic, fibrinolytic, enzymes that remove blood clots. Conventional beliefs identified vitamin Edas an antioxidant that prevented oxidation of unsaturated fats, and this function of vitamin E appeared a to make it inconceivable that vitamin E could also  be of value in relation to the circulatory system. This attitude was still dominant in the 1970s among dietitians, physicians, and university professors. Besides ignoring or ridiculing the work, mainstream journals would Shutes' occasionally publish papers denying that vitamin E facilitates clot removal, or that estrogen promotes clotting, attempting to defend their 180 degree turn. Just after the turn of the century, unsaturated fats were found to inhibit proteolytic enzymes. Repeatedly, the presence of unsaturated fatty acids has been shown to impair clot removal, either by its effect on proteolytic enzymes, or by being incorporated into the clot and making it resistant to dissolution. Fibrin, the material that forms blood clots, is always in the process of formation and dissolution, in a kind of equilibrium. A thin layer of it coats the outside of blood cells, and the inside of blood vessels. When capillaries are leaky, some of the fibrin and its depolymerized subunits, leak out into the tissues. There is a complex interaction between fibrin and collagen, in which fibrin stimulates the formation of collagen (AJ Gray, et al., 1995) and collagen stimulates the fibrin clotting process. * Fibrin clots stimulate the growth of fibroblasts, and leaky blood vessels (Brown, et al., 1989) can lead to tissue fibrosis, though there are routes to fibrosis that don't involve fibrin. Blood vessels leak under the influence of estrogen, irradiation, oxygen deprivation, vitamin E deficiency, free fatty acids, lactic acid, and various stress mediators, such as histamine and serotonin; particles as large as red blood cells can pass right through the endothelial cells. The loss of the blood vessels' ability to serve as a barrier corresponds to a disturbance in the structure of the cells, and this structural permeability is apparently the result of an imbalance in the state of the electrons in the proteins, the redox (reduction and oxidation) state, regulated by glutathione and other antioxidants and energy regulators. The internal state of any cell, not just in the blood vessels, is governed in similar ways by a cellular energy and the redox state of proteins, and  in the oxidatively disturbed state, cells take up water, as well as being abnormally "permeable" in both directions. For example, when a cell is t deficient in vitamin E it loses molecules such as ATP and proteins, that diffuse out into the extracellular spaces. When cells are in an energy deficient state, as in hypothyroidism, they are in this leaky, edematous state. This state of near exhaustion is similar to the "excitotoxic" state that's caused by an imbalance between stimulation and energy production. In the brain, excitotoxins have been found to produce a v kind of fibrosis, in which the cells that normally produce the myelin sheath surrounding nerve axons begin producing collagen, and appear to change into a type of cell (Schwann cell) that is not normally found in the brain. The production of collagen seems to be a very basic kind of J defensive reaction to excessive stimulation or oxygen deprivation. This makes it possible to see "excitotoxicity" as a general process, that includes the kind of fibrosis and calcification of skin that Hans Selye produced (by combining vitamin E deficiency with heavy metal toxicity and local *In the 1920s, W. F. Koch was proposing that oxidative free-radical processes governed the clotting of blood, the healing of wounds, and possibly the calcification of devitalized tissues. At that time, free radicals were an esoteric matter of interest mainly to a few polymer chemists, and it was considered absurd to suggest that cellular respiration could relate to extracellular fibrous matter. irritation), as well as the aging of brain cells produced by prolonged estrogenic stimulation. Scleroderma, like the other "collagen diseaes," affects women (during their reproductive years) much more often than men. Retroperitoneal fibrosis, which can seriously damage the kidneys and other abdominal organs, has been compared to uterine fibroid tumors, and it is commonly treated successfully with the antiestrogenic drug, tamoxifen. Tamoxifen has also been used to treat keloids and to prevent abnormal scars in plastic surgery. (I have seen keloids regress quickly following the application of vitamin E with antiestrogenic hormones.) The fibrotic response to the excitotoxic imbalance can be seen in practically all chronic and degenerative diseases. Fibrosis is an abnormal progression of the normal formation of fibrous material between cells, and it usually involves an increase in the volume of the extracellular material, and an increase in the percentage of collagen in that matrix, and an increased rigidity of the collagen that results from chemical cross-links, that are analogous to the polymerization of a plastic, or the vulcanizing of rubber. Arteriosclerosis is probably the best known medical example of tissue fibrosis, but it's the same phenomenon that makes the meat from an old animal tough and rubbery. Although "stiffness" is a familiar term in engineering and biology, it has some different meanings in different situations. When a tissue swells up with water until it's tight, it is stiffer than in its natural condition. The material of tendons and ligaments gets stiffer by increasing its density and toughness. When a bone gets old, it w gets brittle and weak, and in one sense it is stiffer than a child's bone, since a child's bone can be deformed without breaking. While the engineering definitions can't be applied to all tissues in a simple way, biologically it's useful to think of stiffness as something that progresses along with fibrosis, as the function of a tissue decreases. In the first stage of tissue injury, swelling stiffens a tissue; after prolonged edema, there may be an increased volume and concentration of collagen around cells; finally, the density of the collagen can increase, and can calcifiy, as in the sclera of the eye, the arteries, heart valves, pericardium, and even the heart muscle itself. In diseases of stress and aging, there is a general inflammatory state, that can end in multiple organ failure. Congestive heart failure illustrates some of the effects of this energy-poor, inflamed and edematous state: The heart's function is reduced because of stiffness caused by increased water and calcium in the cells; at the I same time, arteries are stiff and resistant, impairing the flow of blood and making regulation of blood pressure difficult. In chronic hypothyroidism, the heart gradually becomes fibrotic, and this provides an opportunity for calcification to occur. If a callus is a metaphor for the normal, protective function of connective tissue, then a corn is a metaphor for the harmful overdevelopment of the protective reaction. The ordinary minor mechanical tensions and pressures that occur in any living animal, as well as the biochemical gradients produced by metabolizing cells, shape the connective tissues that keep cells in their particular place in the organism. When gelatin, made by boiling connective tissues in water, is injected into a growing organism, the randomly arranged molecules of the melted collagen can be seen to organize themselves back into the coherently aligned cable-like structures of normal connective tissue. Cells decide what they will be and do according to their surroundings. Normally, cells live in contact with a layer of non-cellular material containing fibrous and elastic and gelatinous material, that functions as a medium of communication with other cells. Irritation, stress, and shock commonly produce a series of tissue reactions, including edema, fibrosis, calcification, and death, but with certain possible alternatives, such as a return to the normal state, or early cell death, or lipodystrophy (fatty degeneration), or tumefaction (development into a tumor). Although there are specialized cells, fibroblasts, that form large amounts of connective tissue, they are very closely related to muscle cells, fat cells, and glial cells, and the functions of one can sometimes change into those of another type. One of the main problems of biology in the   last century has been to understand the factors that cause one kind of cell to change into another. One of the functions of the collagen layer secreted around cells appears to be to provide a degree of insulation from the numerous "inductive" factors, so that a cell can remain what it is. Conditions in the whole organism affect the way an individual cell will relate to its immediate environment. Nutritional deficiencies or imbalances will make special demands on certain types of tissue. Increased collagen production can provide some protection against toxins, but the protective layer also limits the cells' access to the blood supply. Cells in their excited and exhausted state are increasingly open to penetration of the toxins, because of their own increased permeability, and because of the increased leakiness of the blood a vessels. Certain environmental toxins accumulate more rapidly as the cells lose their ability to destroy them. Several kinds of toxin, including the unsaturated fats, inhibit the proteolytic enzymes that remodel tissue, and reduce the ability to dismantle and rebuild the extracellular matrix. Collagen is a very unusual protein, since it lacks tryptophan and cysteine, and contains a very high percentage of glycine. Glycine is the simplest amino acid, and serves as an inhibitory transmitter. It has some remarkable protective activities against toxins, but even the process of forming it has some uniquely protective consequences: It is made from sugar, with the addition of ammonia removed from glutamic acid, leaving ketoglutaric acid as the product; ketoglutarate is a component of the Krebs cycle. In effect, the formation of glycine helps to eliminate an excitotoxin while replenishing the pathway of oxidative metabolism. When collagen is dissolved, a large amount of the antitoxic glycine is released, but not a bit of the excitotoxic antithyroid amino acids cysteine and tryptophan. The increased energy deficiency produced by accumulated toxins and fibrosis can stimulate the production of porphyrins for the heme enzymes. that control respiration and detoxification, and this can lead to the production of carbon monoxide and other anti-respiratory factors. Increasing amounts of ammonia and lactic acid circulate through the tissues. As excitatory states replace the capacity for resting inhibition, increased amounts of many hormones and other signal substances circulate, and many of them are produced in unusual sites, often in the same tissues that respond to them, as when a breast cancer produces estrogen. In the absence of communication between the tissue and its environment, these locally produced factors probably serve to maintain local homeostasis, but at the expense of the functions of the whole organism. In every different part of the body, the extracellular matrix reflects the individuality of its cell types and their particular function. But as the body's exposure to toxic imbalances progresses, the general properties of deterioration start to become more important than the specialized functions. To reverse this process, it's necessary to avoid doing the things that caused the problem to develop. The accumulation of heavy metals and of the unstable unsaturated fats (linoleic, linolenic, and arachidonic acids) can be slowed or reversed by careful dietary choices. The calorierestricted diets that slow the aging process reduce the accumulation of the unstable fats and the heavy metals. Vitamin E reduces the vascular leakiness and the free radical peroxidation that are so closely involved in fibrosis. Since serotonin and nitric oxide are involved in these processes, I they should be minimized by keeping carbon i dioxide production high (by optimizing thyroid f function), and by eating proteins that have a safe' balance of the amino acids. Too much arginine / increases nitric oxide formation, and too much tryptophan increases serotonin production. Too much glutamic acid aspartic acid, and cysteine can be directly excitotoxic, and the metabolites of cysteine include proinflammatory homocysteine, which can disrupt collagen structure. Since estrogen is often a promoter of fibrosis, acting in a variety of ways, it should be kept under 7 control by eating enough protein, keeping thyroid function relatively high, and if necessary by using progesterone and other antiestrogenic hormones. A protein deficiency is thrombogenic (clot forming), and probably excitotoxic. boom  Magnesium, taurine, and niacinamide have many protective functions, and can help to reduce  or reverse inflammatory and fibrogenic processes.   
REFERENCES
 Metchnikov, E., 1908, The Prolongation of Life, GP Putnam's Sons, NY. Loeb, L, et al. 1939, Changes in the nature of the stroma in vagina, cervix and uterus of the mouse produced by long continued injections of oestrogens and by advancing age, Amer J Cancer 35, 159. Lipshutz, A, 1950, Steroid Hormones and Tumors. Arvay, A., et al., 1971, The effect of intensive nervous stimulation on certain physicochemical properties of rat tail tendon and uterus collagen, Gerontologia 17, 157-169. 1971 Chvapil, M., et al, Effect of long term hypoxia on protein synthesis in granuloma and in some organs in rats, Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 135,613-617.1970. Casarett, GW, 1963, Concept and criteria of radiologic ageing, In: Cellular Basis and Aetiology of Late Somatic Effects of Ionizing Radiation, RJC Harris, editor, p. 189. Academic Press, NY. Neurosci Lett 1989 Nov 6;105(3):246-50. Presence of Schwann cells in neurodegenerative lesions of the central nervous system. Dusart I, Isacson O, Nothias F, Gumpel M, Peschanski M. Ultrastructural analysis of neurodegenerative CNS lesions produced by an excitotoxic substance revealed that the majority of cells ensheathing axons were not oligodendrocytes. By their morphology and the presence of both a basal lamina and collagen fibers they were identified as Schwann cells. The presence of Schwann cells, whose growth-promoting role in the peripheral nervous system has been largely documented, may account for the development of regenerating growth cones which have been observed in the excitotoxically lesioned central nervous system. Further support for this hypothesis came from the analysis of fetal neural transplants implanted into the lesioned area. Schwann cells ensheathing axons were indeed numerous in the neuron-depleted area surrounding the transplants, where neurite outgrowth of graft origin occurred. Am Rev Respir Dis 1989 Oct;140(4):1104-7. Leaky vessels, fibrin deposition, and fibrosis: a sequence of events common to solid tumors and to many other types of disease. Brown LF, Dvorak AM, Dvorak HF. Solid tumors must induce new blood vessels if they are to grow beyond minimal size. As an initial step in this process, tumors secrete a vascular permeability factor that renders the local microvasculature hyperpermeable to fibrinogen and to other plasma proteins. Extravasated fibrinogen is rapidly clotted to crosslinked fibrin gel. Over time, this gei is invaded by macrophages, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells and undergoes "organization," such that it is replaced by vascularized granulation tissue and finally by mature connective tissue. This sequence of events is not unique to tumors but occurs in wound-healing and in a wide variety of other disease processes, including some that prominently affect the lung. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 1996 Nov;22(4):751-64. Scleroderma epidemiology. Mayes M.D. "Risk factors for disease development include female gender. . . ." Int J  Fertil Womens Med 1998 Sep-Oct;43(5):229-34. Collagen disease: the enemy within. Lahita RG Columbia University, Saint Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York 10019, USA. "Surprisingly, the autoimmune diseases predominate in women of childbearing years." Medicina (B Aires) 1985;45(2):110-6. [Fibrosis and cirrhosis in the rabbit induced by diethylstilbestrol and its inhibition with progesterone]. [Article in Spanish] Lanari A, de Kremer GH. J Steroid Biochem 1983 Jul;19(1A):109-111. Specific cell adhesion to estradiol-derivatized agarose beads Nenci I. Estrogen-target cells in suspension adhere to agarose beads derivatized with estradiol. The interaction is shown to be specific and saturable by appropriate control tests. Medicina (B Aires) 1983;43(6 Pt 1):677-681. [Effect of progesterone on the development of experimental pleural adhesions]. [Article in [Spanish] Garegnani TC, Barcat JA, Pistoia OA, Lanari Fertil Steril 1983 Oct;40(4):542-544. Effect of medroxyprogesterone acetate on peritoneal adhesion formation. Holtz G, Neff M, Mathur S, Perry LC. Fertil Steril 1984 Oct;42(4):538-542. Evaluation of progestogens for postoperative adhesion prevention. Beauchamp PJ, Quigley MM, Held B. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1971;50(1):61-62 Luteal insufficiency and pelvic adhesions. Johansson ED, Persson BH, Gemzell C. Ups J Med Sci 1989;94(2):137-152. Coagulation and fibrinolysis during the normal menstrual cycle. Siegbahn A, Odlind V, Hedner U, Venge P. "In 7/13 women substantial fluctuations of the fibrinolytic activities during the cycle were seen. Four women had a significant fall of the fibrinolytic activity after venous occlusion during the late luteal phase (phase 4) and 3 others during the menstrual phase (phase 5). No co-variation between the fibrinolytic activities and PAI-1 was found. Multiple regression analysis showed a co-variation between fibrinolytic activities and progesterone." Int J Fertil 1988 Mar;33(2):139-142. Effects of progesterone on postoperative adhesion formation in hysterectomized rabbits. Confino E, Friberg J, Vermesh M, Thomas W, Gleicher N. "Subgrouping of adhesion formation into adhesions formed by major surgical tissue trauma or minor peritoneal damage revealed a beneficial effect of progesterone in the reduction of only minor adhesion formation." Fertil Steril 1983 Apr;39(4):485-489. The effect of aqueous progesterone on operative adhesion formation. Maurer JH, Bonaventura LM. "Adhesion formation was significantly reduced (P less than 0.001) in all treatment groups when compared with the control group. Aqueous P may have a role in the prevention of adhesion formation associated with pelvic surgery and, in particular, microscopic tubal and ovarian surgery." Am J Physiol 1999 Nov;277(5 Pt 1):L952-9. Production of superoxide and TNF-alpha from alveolar macrophages is blunted by glycine. Wheeler MD, Thurman RG. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2000 Aug;279(2):L390-8 Dietary glycine blunts lung inflammatory cell influx following acute endotoxin. Wheeler MD, Rose ML, Yamashima S, Enomoto N, Seabra V, Madren J, Thurman RG. "Acute dietary glycine prevents mortality and blunts increases in serum tumor necrosis factoralpha (TNF-alpha) following endotoxin in rats." "Chronic glycine improves survival by unknown mechanisms, but reduction of lung inflammation is likely involved." Circ Res 1992 Oct;71(4):831-9. Decreased collagen gene expression and absence of fibrosis in thyroid hormone-induced myocardial hypertrophy. Response of cardiac fibroblasts to thyroid hormone in vitro. Yao J, Eghbali M. "In this study we examined the effects of thyroid hormone on collagen gene expression in thyroid hormone-induced myocardial hypertrophy and the response of cardiac fibroblasts to thyroid hormone in culture." "Collagen synthesis as shown by immunofluorescent staining of intracellular collagen in cultured fibroblasts and in frozen sections of myocardium was also diminished." Cardiovasc Res 1992 Jun;26(6):603-7. Decreased collagen mRNA and regression of cardiac fibrosis in the ventricular myocardium of the tight skin mouse following thyroid hormone treatment. Yao J, Eghbali M. "The aim was to study the effect of thyroid hormone on collagen gene expression in the myocardium of the tight skin mouse (TSK), a genetic model of myocardial fibrosis." "Effects of thyroid hormone on ventricular gene expression in TSK mice result in a diminished collagen mRNA and collagen content and the disappearance of cardiac fibrosis. Thyroid hormone may selectively prevent the induction of cardiac fibrosis and play an important role in regression of cardiac fibrosis via endocrine pathways." J Mol Cell Cardiol 1998 Nov;30(11):2495506. An activator protein-1 (AP-1) response element on pro alphal(l) collagen gene is necessary for thyroid hormone-induced inhibition of promoter activity in cardiac fibroblasts. Lee HW, Klein LE, Raser J, Eghbali-Webb M.  "Thyroid hormone-induced ventricular hypertrophy is characterized by the absence of fibrosis. Previously, we demonstrated that thyroid hormone inhibits collagen type I gene expression in the myocardium and in cardiac fibroblasts. We also demonstrated that thyroid hormones act as inhibitor of pro alphal(l) collagen promoter activity." 2000 Apr Mol  25;162(1-2):45-55. Molecular characterization of myocardial fibrosis during hypothyroidism: evidence for negative regulation of the pro-alphal(I) collagen gene expression by thyroid hormone receptor. Chen WJ, Lin KH, Lee YS. First Cardiovascular Division, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taiwan. "The purpose of this study was to gain insights into the underlying mechanism of myocardial fibrosis during hypothyroidism. Treatment of cardiac fibroblasts with a medium lacking thyroid hormone led to a 47% increase in [3H]thymidine incorporation into the cell nuclei compared with that in untreated cells." Acta Pathol Jpn 1984 Jul;34(4):797-811. Progeria with cardiac hypertrophy and review of 12 autopsy cases in the literature. Shozawa T, Sageshima M, Okada E. "Histologic findings suggest that increasing of collagen in the connective tissue may play an important role in progeria. Further study of metabolic disturbance in the connective tissue of progeria is necessary." Exp Cell Res 1999 May 1;248(2):634-42. Differential regulation of PAI-1 gene expression in human fibroblasts predisposed to a fibrotic phenotype. Higgins PJ, Slack JK, Diegelmann RF, Staiano-Coico L. Adv Perit Dial 1994;10:225-9. In vitro influence of lactate on function of peritoneal fibroblasts. Breborowicz A, Martis L, Oreopoulos DG "The authors studied the effect of sodium lactate (NaLact) on the function of human peritoneal fibroblasts (F) in vitro." "When applied to fibroblast monolayers, NaLact (40 mM) increased the synthesis of total proteins by 10%. Exposure of the fibroblasts to NaLact did not increase noncollagen protein production, and the observed increase in total protein synthesis was due to the increased synthesis of collagen." "... NaLact is specifically responsible for the increased production of collagen by peritoneal fibroblasts, leading to the deposition of masses of collagen in the extracellular space." Am J Physiol 1994 Oct;267(4 Pt 2):H1557-64. Loss of elastic recoil in postischemic myocardium induces rightward shift of the systolic pressure-volume relationship. Krams R, Janssen M, Van der Lee C, Van Meegen J, De Jong JW, Slager CJ, Verdouw PD. "Ischemia-induced systolic dysfunction has been ascribed to changes in cellular excitation-contraction coupling and diastolic dysfunction because of disruption of the extracellular collagen matrix." "We hypothesize that the rightward shift of the systolic pressure-volume relationship was compatible with a decrease of elastic-restoring forces, probably induced by alterations in the extracellular collagen matrix and/or the cytoskeleton, and thereby our data imply that left ventricular     dysfunction     of     postischemic myocardium does not result solely from disturbances in excitation-contraction coupling." Biochim  6;1200(2):93-9. Possible role of cell redox state on     collagen     metabolism      in      carbon tetrachloride-induced cirrhosis as evidenced by adenosine administration to rats. HernandezMunoz R, Diaz-Munoz M, Chagoya de Sanchez Nitric Oxide 2000 Aug; 4(4):399-411. Suppression of bleomycin-induced nitric oxide production in mice by taurine and niacin. Gurujeyalakshmi G, Wang Y, Giri SN. "The ability of taurine and niacin to suppress the BL-induced increased production of NO secondary to decreases in iNOS mRNA and protein appears to be one of the mechanisms for their anti-inflammatory and antifibrotic effects." Clin Chim Acta 1983 Oct 14;133(3):311-6. Cystic fibrosis-like changes in saliva of healthy persons subjected to anaerobic exercise. Bardon A, Ceder O, Kollberg H. The biochemical composition of saliva secreted by healthy persons and by heterozygotes and homozygotes of cystic fibrosis at rest and by healthy persons subjected to aerobic or anaerobic effort were compared. In the saliva from cystic fibrosis homozygotes at rest substantial increases of the activity of ribonuclease (p less than 0.001) and of the concentrations of protein (p less than 0.001), lactate (p less than 0.001), sodium (p less than 0.001), potassium (p less than 0.01) and calcium (p less than 0.05) were found in comparison with saliva from healthy persons at rest. In the saliva from cystic fibrosis heterozygotes at rest similar but less pronounced changes were seen. After anaerobic exercise these biochemical parameters were increased in the saliva of healthy persons and mimicked the values of cystic fibrosis saliva. However, after aerobic effort no changes other than a slightly increased ribonuclease activity were seen in the saliva of healthy persons. This indicates that salivary glands of cystic fibresis patients, at rest, are in the same state of lactate acidosis and energy depletion as these glands are in healthy persons after anaerobic work. Hepatology 1991 Mar; 13(3):551-6. Regulation of collagen production in freshly isolated cell populations from normal and cirrhotic rat liver: effect of lactate. Cerbon-Ambriz J, CerbonSolorzano J, Rojkind M. Gastroenterology 1984 0 Oct;87(4):777-87. Acetaldehyde and lactate stimulate collagen synthesis of cultured baboon liver myofibroblasts. Savolainen ER, Leo MA, Timp! R, Lieber CS. J Immunol 1990 Sep 15;145(6):1838-44. Mast clls and pulmonary fibrosis. Identification of a histamine releasing factor in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Broide DH, Smith CM, Wasserman SI. J Clin Oncol 1999 Oct;17(10):3283-90. Striking regression of chronic radiotherapy damage in a clinical trial of combined pentoxifylline and tocopherol. Delanian S, Balla-Mekias S, Lefaix JL. Microcirculation     2000      Aug;7(4):269-80. Effects of myocardial edema on the development of myocardial interstitial fibrosis. Davis KL, Laine GA, Geissler HJ, Mehlhorln U, Brennan M, Allen SJ. Chest 1997 Nov 5;112(5):1184-8. Upregulation of collagen messenger RNA expression occurs immediately after lung damage. Deheinzelin D, Jatene FB, Saldiva PH, Brentani RR. Mar-Apr;4(2):295-9. Hepatology 1984 Frequency of hyperprolinemia in alcoholic liver cirrhosis: relationship to blood lactate. Shaw S, Worner TM, Lieber CS. J Orthop Res 1998 Jan;16(1):104-11. Generation of nitric oxide by lapine meniscal cells and its effect on matrix metabolism: stimulation of collagen production by arginine. Cao M, Stefanovic-Racic M, Georgescu HI, Miller LA, Evans CH. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1995 Jun;12(6):684-90. Partially degraded fibrin(ogen) stimulates fibroblast proliferation in vitro. Gray AJ, Bishop JE, Reeves JT, Mecham RP, Laurent GJ Gastroenterology 1995 Apr;108(4):1124-33 Accumulation and cellular localization of fibrinogen/fibrin during short-term and longterm rat liver injury. Neubauer K, Knittel T, Armbrust T, Ramadori G J Diabetes Complications 1997 Nov-Dec; 1(6):323-7. Ethnicity and prevalence of scleroderma-like syndrome: a study of Arab and Jewish Israeli insulin-dependent diabetic children. Brik R, Berant M, Sprecher E, Yarnitsky D, Ganaym Z, Vardi P Department of Pediatrics, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. Scleroderma-like syndrome (SLS) may represent the earliest apparent diabetes complication in insulin-dependent diabetic (IDDM) patients. Biochem Cell Biol 1999 Int Mar-Apr;31(3-4):499-508. Susceptibility of cultured rat hepatocytes to oxidative stress by peroxides and iron. The extracellular matrix affects the toxicity of tert-butyl hydroperoxide. Hagen K, Zhu C, Melefors O, Hultcrantz R. "The aim of this study was to set up an in vitro model for studying the importance of an altered extracellular matrix composition and its importance for the resistance to oxidative stress, in hepatocytes from normal and iron loaded rats." 1995 Akad Nauk Ser Biol Izv May-Jun;(3):361-6. [Disruption of the permeability of blood-tissue barriers in mechanisms of primary reaction to irradiation]. [Article in Russian] Arlashchenko NI.