 
I. Introduction
 Not for republication without written permission. Copyright 1997 Raymond Peat P.O. Box 5764, Eugene, OR 97405 several decades suggesting that there is no independent biological clock at all, but rather an ability of cells and organisms to perceive rhythmic environmental conditions. Frank A. Brown, Jr. (Univ. of Indiana) and Alexandre Rothen (Rockefeller Univ.) devised many experiments that clearly demonstrated that biochemical, metabolic and physiological rhythms are responsive to cues other than light and darkness. The geomagnetic field is one type of cue that has demonstrable biological effects. The doctrine of a genetic clock causing aging denies the role of environmental factors in the aging process. Cigarette companies argued that "we don't know the cause of cancer, so go ahead and smoke." The genetic clock people claim to know the cause of aging, and that it is not environmental factors. Hayflickers, Dolly & dandruff: The "telomeric clock" is not a valid theory of aging. The roles of nutrition, estrogen, and progesterone in stress-related energy problems:  A meaningful pattern for all organisms. Besides the commercially promoted idea that melatonin has something to do with a "biological clock," there are two main doctrines among biologists about the nature of the clock that they suppose exists. One group argues that a group of/ brain cells called the suprachiasmatic nucleus has a regular rate of firing that is "determined by genes" and that controls biological rhythms. Unfortunately for that theory, the firing rate of "Estrogen's identity as a shock-hormone gives an insight into the context-dependent aging of cells and carcinogenesis. The pro-respiratory progesterone is involved as estrogen's antagonist at the deepest molecudar levels." "The stem cell is defined as that cell in a tissue which, under normal circumstances, maintainsits own population, undiminished in function and size, and furnishes daughters to provide new functional cells of that tissue. The daughters may, or may not, have to udergo further differentiation and/or maturation in order to achieve their functional stage. The fundamental characteristic of a stem cell, therefore, is selfrenewal. Evidence is presented which implicates the microenvironment as a major component of the stem cell system, without which stem cells cannot be maintained. Furthermore, it is suggested that stem cell properties do not reside in one specific cell type in the population but, when necessary, cells other than those normally playing the stem cell role, can have stem cell function imposed upon them by the appropriate microenvironment. The stem cell "niche" hypothesis is presented to explain the dependence of stem cells upon their microenvironment. The postulate is offered that there are no cells which are intrinsically stem cells but that a range of cells in a tissue possess stem cell potential to a greater or lesser extent." "The stem cell system," R. Schofield, Biomed Pharmacother, 1983, 37:8, 375-80. those cells turns out to be variable under different conditions of metabolism and temperature (Ruby and Heller, 1996). Another general kind of clock is proposed to A be "determined by the genes," or genetically "programmed," and in this case the clock is supposed to determine how long an animal can live. Neither of these groups has even tried to dispose of the facts that have accumulated over 
ay Peat's Newsletter
 .. TNU LLPOP  -DIANS  can live much longer than the animal they came from, and that the age of the donor doesn't determine the survival of the transplant. Studies of the rate of cell division in the lining of the intestine and of the bone marrow cells that continuously produce red blood cells throughout the life-span also have shown gross violations of the "Hayflick limit." Dandruff, the result of the steady division of cells in the epidermis, and the growth of nails and hair, are easily visible demonstrations that Hayflick's observations were just the result of the special conditions he created in his cell culture bottles. The gradual accumulation of support for the principles Carrel outlined inciudes evidence that cell-to-cell interactions (R. Auerbach, 1972), adequacy of glucose supply, oxygen and carbon dioxide, appropriate pH, osmolarity, hormones, extracellular matrix (Gospodarowicz), hormones, and many regulatory substances including proteins and fats, can fundamentally change the ability of cells to divide in culture vessels. For example, Gospodarowicz, et al. (1983) found that growing cells on "extracellular matrix," and with some natural substances from serum, plasma.") rather than on plastic, made the difference between an in vitro longevity of 15 or 24 divisions, and "at least 88" cell divisions. If the "intrinsic cell aging" people want to talk in terms of "programming," then we would have to say that cells are con.stantly open to "reprogramming," which is to say that they are perceptive and responsive to their environment. Hayflick's method began with tissue that could rule that it is inaccurate to speak of a rule. be kept, either at room temperature or at 5 degrees, "for at least 5 days" (and "up to 3 weeks") "without apparent loss of viability." Although the people normally don't. lactic acid production is a sign of stress, it seems that Hayflick took it as an indication of life: "Once the cultures have become confluent cell sheets, the cells are very active metabolically, as shown by the fact that the GM [growth medium] in the same cell. becomes acid faster than in cultures of heteroploid cell lines inoculated with the same number of cells." "Although mitotic activity eventually ceases in the culture, acid production continues; and as dictated by drops in the pH, cultures can be ed – rell mied pon through depend by for sluck, Dioli's letter PH, Gozingrou mativ, in itio fed for a few months until all acid production ceases and the culture is observed to have completely degenerated." Among the ridiculously antiphysiological conditions used in Haflick's experiments was the addition of high concentrations of penicillin and streptomycin, or aureomycin, to the growth medium. (See Pershadang, et al., 1982.) He refers to Carrel's techniques as "primitive," and says "In any event, Carrel's experiment has never been confirmed." (Carrel's experiment continued for 35 years, so it will be a while before anyone repeats it.) Carrel's "primitive" method involved frequent addition of chick embryo extract rather than Hayflick's commercial solutions of salts, buffers, and antibiotics, with the addition of very small amounts of calf or horse serum. Using fluids from the same species, from an embryo rather than from an adult, and avoiding harmful additives, might be more properly called a sophisticated technique, rather than primitive incompetence. (Smith, et al., 1985, showed that DNA "repair capacity was always found to be greatest in medium supplemented with autologous plasma.") The essence of the telomeric clock doctrine is that the telomere shortens with aging, making cell division impossible, and causing the organism to suffer the symptoms of aging, while the "immortal germ cells and cancer cells" have active telomerase that allows them to maintain long telomeres. Besides the "inappropriate" telomere length that has been seen in some individuals of different ages, there are so many exceptions to the rule that it is inaccurate to speak of a rule. Mice, with a very short life-span, have active telomerase in their body tissues, while Telomerase isn't the people normally don't. needed to form or maintain telomeres. Some cancers have long telomeres, some don't. Telomere length varies between organs in the same animal, and even between chromosomes in the same cell. To say that the theory of the telomeric-mitotic clock is complete junk is not to question the importance of the telomere itself-like any part of the cell, it is complex, important, and interesting. 
IV. DNA, stress, and estrogen
 big step to go from "stress hormone" to "age hormone." Estrogen is beginning to lose its false identity as the "female hormone," which was always just a promotional concept of the pharmaceutical industry. Hundreds of false claims have been made about estrogen's "youth promoting" effects, but they always turn out to be the opposite of what is claimed. For example, "estrogen increases the collagen content of skin," but in fact collagen accumulation is characteristic of aging, radiation injury, and many other types of damage. "Estrogen makes the skin plumper," but it is by causing water retention; bloating might stretch wrinkly skin until it is smooth, or even tight, but a swollen old face is, if anything, biologically older than a lean and creased face. (I have discussed many other such advertising ploys in my books, e.g., From PMS to Menopause: Hormones in Context.) identity as the "female hormone," which was If Hayflick and Carrel have anything in always just a promotional concept of the pharmacommon, it is the observation that aging is closely ceutical industry. Hundreds of false claims have associated with the slowing of cell division. been made about estrogen's "youth promoting" Carrel's observation that the rate of healing is effects, but they always turn out to be the opposite slower in old individuals has been repeated in of what is claimed. For example, "estrogen different systems, for example (Lambert, et al., increases the collagen content of skin," but in fact 1979) showing that DNA repair synthesis is collagen accumulation is characteristic of aging, retarded in cells from old people. Estrogen also radiation injury, and many other types of damage. slows DNA repair (O'Brien, 1993), as well as "Estrogen makes the skin plumper," but it is by causing increased DNA breakage. causing water retention; bloating might stretch Estrogen's identity as a shock-hormone gives wrinkly skin until it is smooth, or even tight, but a an insight into the context-dependent aging of swollen old face is, if anything, biologically older cells and carcinogenesis. The pro-respiratory than a lean and creased face. (I have discussed progesterone is involved as estrogen's antagonist many other such advertising ploys in my books, at the deepest molecular levels. e.g., From PMS to Menopause: Hormones in Fifty years ago, estrogen was shown to imitate Context.) all of the physiological features of the shock phase of the stress reaction, and later it was found The types of adaptation to stress that are that histamine and estrogen (and now, nitric known to occur both in vitro and in normal aging oxide) have parallel shock-promoting actions. of the animal, include the various defensive More recently, cells (all kinds of cell, includsystems such as the heat shock proteins, which ing bacteria) have been found to have a system of are induced by stresses that interfere with the proteins, called heat shock proteins, that are cll's energy supply. produced in response to any stress or shock, and During the last 35 years there have been many j estrogen turns out to have a very close association demonstrations that cells in culture do not get an with these stress-induced proteins. Estrogen optimal amount of oxygen. (Wolffe, et al., 1984,' induces the heat shock proteins, and the heat for example.) Kondo et al. (1997) have recently shock proteins activate or stabilize the estrogen shown that cells grown at the interface where the receptor, so that injury in general facilitates culture medium meets the air are more like the action of estrogen on the cell. Progesterone normal cells: They "possess highly differentiated and its receptor have an opposite and antagonistic functions and structures compared with the cells effect on the heat shock proteins. to cultured under immersion." Previously, as In 1970, my proposal that the estrogenic state Warburg pointed out, it was found that the cells and the senescent state were very closely related that grow in a sheet on the bottom of the vessel seemed strange to people who had heard estrogen were much more oxygen-deprived than the cells treatment promoted as the way to prolong youth which are immersed, but suspended, and receive and to stay "forever feminine," but a few years oxygen and nutrients from all sides. after I had finished my dissertation, Terry ParkenSuffocation and x-ray injury produce an ing, who had worked in Proferssor Soderwall's lab estrogen-like response in animals. The oxygen at the same time I had, began publishing observadeprivation in tissue culture, which Warburg tions of elevated estrogen levels in a variety of showed created the characteristic cancer aging animals. Estrogen is now known to metabolism, produces the pro-estrogenic heat increase with athletic stress, trauma, sickness, shock proteins, as well as other stress endotoxin poisoning, etc., and to be an essential substances. The antagonism of progesterone to factor in prostate cancer, as well as in essentially the actions of this heat stress system gives us all other cancers, so it doesn't seem to be such a !. S CAN CAN CAN CAN FRT "; Heat SINCE PRI, SULL P &M In Enviru Lang luAnd Inst Bunners in the Fort to the archive les none of the les none complete len he Collusion    UN (PR  lals, 191  RAL ALL valley (1964) STREM further insight into how to redirect cells away estrogenic cell division process, but in the from the stress pathway. absence of either adequate energy or appropriate During oxidative stress, a variety of stress signals, they were on a dead-end path. The proteins are produced, besides the heat shock specific substances in the culture medium could system. Heme oxygenase, which produces carbon be investigated if we needed to know the detailed monoxide, is one of these stress proteins, and I cellular physiology of that dead-end path, but giving serious scientific consideration have previously discussed how this stress-induced to production of carbon monoxide could stabilize the Hayflick's doctrine is itself a dead-end path. cells' dedifferentiated tumor-producing state, The editors of Experimental Cell Research, since carbon monoxide produces what Warburg who devoted 36 pages to the 1961 article, and 22 " has characterized as the "cancer metabolism," pages to the 1965 article, bear a portion of aerobic glycolysis, in which cells produce lactic responsibility for publishing ridiculous, illogical, acid even in the presence of oxygen. In Hayflick's unfounded, and simply false statements; it would original article (Hayflick and Moorhead, 1961), be hard to identify any standard of quality that the production of lactic acid by the cells doesn't was followed in accepting those articles for publiseem to be of interest to the authors. I have also cation. The mass media can't be blamed too much in this case, because the scientific media introduced the idea that the stress-proteins could have far reaching effects through an effect on the themselves have been manipulated. structure of water. To talk about "reversing aging" by adding But apart from those points, it is now well telomerase to cells reminds me of the advertiseestablished that the heat shock proteins stabilize ments for an apparatus that allowed you to recline and reinforce the effects of estrogen. Estrogen with your head lower than your feet, except that tends to shift cells away from differentiated when you age upside down, by lying around on functioning and toward simple cell division, a sort that device, there is a silly grain of truth in the of dedifferentiation. This cell division is imporclaim that you have "reversed" the aging process. tant for reproduction, and it is also part of a basic The fact that cells are always open to process of tissue regeneration. During stress or "reprogramming," which simply means injury, as well as in normal growth, cells have responding appropriately to their environment, to make the basic decision of whether to grow is an important thing to keep in mind. Alexis or to die in the non-inflammatory process Carrel's experiments are still the best demonstracalled apoptosis, or to differentiate and contribtion that biological aging is essentially a response ute to the functional systems of the organism. to something in the cells' environment. Carrel's The heat shock/estrogen system protects cells emphasis on fats as an important aspect of aging against "altruistic cell death," but ordinarily the is massively supported by research in nutrition, organism rescues the cells from that dedifferentiorgan transplantation, and tissue culture. ated state by providing energy, oxygen, and It is now clear that estrogen is intimately signals to restore them to an appropriate related to the universal stress-reaction system, functional state. the heat shock proteins. Progesterone, the most The stress pathway at first stimulates cell direct and general antagonist to estrogen, is division, directing cells to differentiate down a now seen to be involved in this fundamental pathway that is useful in tissue repair, but this system-it opposes the actions of the stress stress-response is not useful in the culture dish, proteins, and the stress proteins mediate the and the absence of the rest of the organism means factors which cause a progesterone deficiency. that nothing will come from their growth decision, other than persisting under the damaging, stressful Progesterone, thyroid, saturated fats, and conditions. light are primary antistress factors which have In Hayflick's cell culture, the cells were already been shown to protect against some of Lclearly under sufficient stress to activate their the effects of aging (such as autoimmune H.<.P  Festio ax esho shi i-h  la  di fRicotial con  cell  ver  lad, i-FevtavaFuLes reactions), and against the stresses which contribute to aging, and in many cases to reverse age-associated changes that have already occurred (such as regenerating the thymus). To fully reverse aging we need to know all of the factors that cause it; Dolly is proof that adult cells are not, in themselves, "old," and is to confirmation that Carrel was on the right track. 
REFERENCES
 Antipenko AYe, Antipenko YN, Adv Enzyme Regul 1994;34:173-198, "Thyroid hormones and regulation of cell reliability systems," Institute of Physiology, St. Petersburg University, Russia. "Data and arguments are presented that provide evidence of a role played by thyroid hormones (TH) in cell reliability improvement. This role may be determined by synergistic TH action on the following key cell reliability systems: (1) reactive oxygen species (ROS) attack inhibition, and (2) genetic structure repair from injuries inflicted in the course of endogenous and induced mutagenesis. (1) New approaches to ROS oxidation defence were examined. It has been shown that Ca(2+)-ATPase and, probably, regulatory proteins of cell membranes may be the main target for oxidative attack. Protein phosphorylation as well as use of dithiothreitol will lead to a protective action against Ca2+ transport damaging in aorta smooth muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum under oxidation by HOCl, the most toxic ROS of activated neutrophils, whereas thyroxine (T4) and 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine (T3) validly inhibit chemiluminescence in human neutrophils activated by pyrogenal, a lipopolysaccharide from Salmonella typhi cell wall. As this takes place, TH most likely block neutrophil stimulation at the receptor-ligand interaction level. In this case L-T4 and L-T3 antioxidative effect is greater than that of DL-thyroxine and much greater than that produced by such a potent antioxidant as 4-methyl-2,6-diisobutyl phenol. (2) T4 acts as reparogen in rat liver cells uder X-ray irradiation when a dose measuring one-half of daily hormone production by the normally functioning thyroid gland is administered to animals. Ionizing radiation dose reduction factor reached 1.3-1.4 following T4 administration. Reparogenic effect of T4 persists for at least 2 months from the moment the hormone has been administered and can be reduced in the presence of dinitrophenol. It is important to note that antioxidant and reparogenic TH potential can manifest itself within the range of physiologic concentrations of these hormones. Therefore, stimulation of cell reliability systems with TH may prove to be important for correcting conditions caused by errors in energyand Ca(2+)-dependent DNA repair under extensive ROS attack. In particular, taking into account different responsiveness of normal and neoplastic tissues to TH, the use of TH reparogenic as well as antioxidant potential may contribute significantly to the improvement of antitumor radiotherapy efficacy. Baraboi VA, Nikiforova. NA, Moskalenko IP, Radiobiologiia 1990 May;30(3):305-307, "[The ability of peripheral blood lymphocytes to repair DNA and the survival of rats].[Article in Russian]," "Individual and group differences were revealed in the capacity of rat peripheral blood lymphocytes of DNA repair in response to the DNA damaging test-effect of irradiation in vitro. The survival rate of rats irradiated with a dose inducing 50-per cent death was in a definite relationship with the repair capacity of blood lymphocyte DNA in each animal individual prior to irradiation." Byrne E, Dennett X, Trounce I, Rev Neurol (Paris) 1991; 147(6-7):532-535. "Oxidative energy failure in post-mitotic cells: a major factor in senescence." "A significant decline with age in state III respiration rates has been documented in man and experimental animals in several tissues." Focal areas of cytochrome oxidase negativity, resembling those in skeletal muscle fibres in patients with chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) syndromes, appear in old age. The mitochondrial genome is susceptible to mutation because of a high turnover rate, ineffective DNA repair mechanisms and a hostile environment rich in free radicals. The available data supports the development of mitochondrial failure in old age in fixed post-mitotic tissues suggesting that mitochondrial failure may be central to the senescent process." Mydlarski MB, Liberman A, Schipper HM, Neurobiol Aging 1995 16(6):977-981, "Estrogen induction of glial heat shock proteins: implications for hypothalamic aging." "In the aging mammalian hypothalamus, a unique subpopulation of glial cells accumulates peroxidase-positive cytoplasmic inclusions distinct from lipofuscin. In adult rodents, this senescence-dependent glial granulation is accelerated by administration of estradiol valerate. In the present study, brain sections derived from male rats given 3 monthly intramuscular injections of estradiol valerate (0.2 mg or 2.0 mg) were immunostained for heat shock proteins and glial fibrillary acidic protein to determine whether a glial stress response is implicated in estrogen-induced granulation. Our findings indicate that estrogen elicits a heat shock response and subsequent granulation in astrocytes residing in estradiol receptor-rich brain regions including the arcuate nucleus and the wall surrounding the third ventricle but not in estradiol receptor-deficient regions such as the striatum and corpus callosum. The heat shock proteins induced by estrogen, namely, the 27, 72, and 90 kDa stress proteins, are upregulated in astrocytes in response to oxidative challenge supporting our hypothesis that estrogen mediates senescent changes in the rodent hypothalamus through oxidative mechanisms." Castagnetta LA, Carruba G, Ciba Found Symp 1995;191:269-286, "Human prostate cancer: a direct role for oestrogens." Gospodarowicz D; Hirabayashi K; Giguere L; Tauber JP, "Factors controlling the proliferative rate, final cell density, and life span of bovine vascular smooth muscle cells in culture," J Cell Biol, 1981 Jun, 89:3, 568-78 "Low density vascular smooth muscle (VSM) cell cultures maintained on extracellular-matrix(ECM)-coated dishes and plated in the presence of either plasma or serum will proliferate actively when serum-containing medium is replaced by a synthetic medium supplemented with three factors: high density lipoprotein (HDL, 250 micrograms protein/ml); insulin (2.5 micrograms/ml) or somatomedin C (10 ng/ml); and fibroblast growth factor (FGF, 100 ng/ml) or epidermal growth factor (EGF, 50 ng/ml). The omission of any of these three factors from the synthetic medium results in a lower growth rate of the cultures, as well as in a lower final cell density once cultures reach confluence. When cells are plated in the total absence of serum, transferrin (10 micrograms/ml) is also required to induce optimal cell growth. The effects of the substrate and medium supplements on the life span of VSM cultures have also been analyzed. Cultures maintained on plastic and exposed to medium supplemented with 5% bovine serum underwent 15 generations. However, when maintained on ECM-coated dishes the serum-fed cultures had a life span of at least 88 generations. Likewise, when cultures were maintained in a synthetic medium supplemented with HDL and either FGF or EGF, an effect on the tissue culture life span by the substrate was observed. Cultures maintained on plastic underwent 24 generations, whereas those maintained on ECM-coated dishes could be passaged repeatedly for 58 generations. These experiments demonstrate the influence of the ECM-substrate only in promoting cell growth but also in increasing the longevity of the cultures." Jorge AD, Stati AO, Roig LV, Ponce G, Jorge OA, Ciocca DR, "Steroid receptors and heat-shock proteins in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis," Hepatology. 1993 Nov; 18(5): 1108-1114. Khanna A, Aten RF, Behrman HR, Endocrinology 1995 136(4):1775-1781, "Physiological and pharmacological inhibitors of luteinizing hormonedependent steroidogenesis induce heat shock protein-70 in rat luteal cells." Kondo M, Tamaoki J, Sakai A, Kameyama S, Kanoh S, Konno K., Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1997 16(1):62-68. "Increased oxidative metabolism in cow tracheal epithelial cells cultured at air-liquid interface." "Airway epithelial cells cultured at the air-liquid interface possess highly differentiated functions and structures compared with the cells cultured under immersion. We examined the oxidative metabolism and glycolysis in cow tracheal epithelial cells on Days 3, 6, 10, and 13, cultured under three different conditions: (1) immersion culture on porous filters with apical and basolateral feeding (IM), (2) air-exposed culture on porous filters with basolateral feeding, i.e., air-liquid interface culture (AI), and (3) conventional immersion culture in plastic dishes with apical feeding (DI). Lactate production was less in AI than in IM and DI on Day 3 through Day 13, whereas cellular adenosine triphosphate content and basal O2 consumption were greater. Ouabain-sensitive and ouabain-insensitive 02 consumption, and the uncoupled 02 consumption were also greater in Al. Cytosolic lactate dehydrogenase activities on Day 10 were lower in AJ, whereas alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase activities were higher. The increased oxidative metabolism in AI was more pronounced at the late phase of culture (Days 10 and 13). In contrast, glycolysis remained elevated during the experiment in IM and DI. These data suggest that (I) AI begins to promote oxidative metabolism from growth phase by the provision of adequate oxygenation, and then further shifts to oxidative metabolism with differentiation; and (2) apical feeding may be responsible for the disturbance of the development of the oxidative metabolism." Lambert B, Ringborg U, Skoog L, Cancer Res 1979 39(7 Pt 1):2792-2795. "Age-related decrease of ultraviolet light-induced DNA repair synthesis in human peripheral leukocytes," "The capacity for ultraviolet light-induced DNA repair synthesis, studied in peripheral leukocytes from 58 healthy subjects 13 to 94 years old, was found to vary greatly between individuals. A negative, statistically significant correlation was obtained between age and this synthesis, indicating a decrease in repair capacity with age. An age-related decrease in DNA repair may increase the susceptibility of cells to agents causing DNA damage, i.e. carcinogens and certain cytostatic drugs." O'Brien SN, Larcom LL, Baxley EG, Horm Res 1993; 39(5-6):241-246. "Correlates of plasma cortisol and DNA repair in human peripheral lymphocytes: suppression of repair in women taking estrogen. " " We have examined the relationship between total plasma cortisol concentration and DNA repair capacity in human peripheral lymphocytes cultured in vitro; the data indicate that high concentrations of cortisol (> 20 micrograms/dl) inhibit DNA repair. The inhibitory effect can be abrogated by the addition of RU38486, a cortisol antagonist. In addition, we compared plasma cortisol concentration and in vitro DNA repair capacity in 52 healthy individuals. Females on therapeutic estrogen (oral contraceptive or estrogen replacement therapy) had significantly elevated plasma cortisol and suppression of DNA repair capacity." Pershadsingh HA, Martin AP, Vorbeck ML, Long JW Jr, Stubbs EB, Jr., J Biol Chem 1982 257(21): 12481-12484. "Ca2+-dependent depolarization of energized mitochondrial membrane potential by chlortetracycline (aureomycin)." "The addition of chlortetracycline (CTC) to succinate-energized rat liver mitochondria resulted in depolarization of the membrane potential and decreased respiratory control. CTC inhibited both processes at concentrations that were half maximally effective at approximately 13 and 16 microM, respectively. These inhibitory effects were prevented by either the Ca2+ ethylene glycol bis(beta-aminoethyl chelator, ether)-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid, or the inhibitor of mitochondrial Ca2+ influx, ruthenium red. These findings are consistent with the formation of a membrane associated calcium-CTC complex and suggest that CTC can alter mitochondrial energy metabolism during transmembrane Ca2+ cycling." Smith ME, Larcom LL, Freeman SE, Chem Biol Interact 1985 Aug;54(3):325-335 "Serum effects on DNA repair in human cells." "Freshly isolated human lymphocytes were used to determine how serum supplements affect cellular capacity to repair UV damage. Repair capacity was always found to be greatest in medium supplemented with autologous plasma. Variability in repair capacity among individuals was greater in serum supplemented medium than in unsupplemented medium. Thus, in vitro cellular responses will most accurately represent in vivo responses if autologous serum factors are present in the culture medium. This is of particular importance in studies attempting to correlate DNA repair capacity with age or susceptibility to carcinogenesis." Piotrowicz RS, Weber LA, Hickey E, Levin EG., FASEB J 1995 Aug;9(11):1079-1084, "Accelerated growth and senescence of arterial endothelial cells expressing the small molecular weight heat-shock protein HSP27." "Bovine arterial endothelial cells were stably transfected with the human wild-type (wt) HSP27 or a mutant gene (mu) encoding a nonphosphorylatable form of the protein. At early passage both cultural and cellular morphology were similar, although the vacuole content in wtHSP27 was much higher than muHSP27 cells. As the cultures aged, wtHSP27 cells became large, polymorphic, highly vacuolated, and reached senescence before muHSP27 transfected cultures, which remained small and polygonal with few detectable vacuoles. Vector control cells showed an intermediate phenotype. Tritiated thymidine incorporation studies were performed with multiple wtHSP27 and muHSP27 clones and the results compared with 11 vector control clones. The results showed an average increase in growth rate for the wtHSP27 cells of 3.0 +/- 0.6 times. The growth rate of eight muHSP27 clones showed a slight decrease. Estradiol treatment of endothelial cells resulted in an increase in both bovine and human HSP27, with peak expression at 100 nM. Treatment of the vector-transfected cells with 100 nM estradiol resulted in a 1.44 +/- 0.18 fold increase in growth rate, which was blocked by expression of muHSP27. These data demonstrate a role for HSP27 in controlling the growth rate of cells in an estrogen-responsive endothelial manner." Ruby, NF, Heller, HC., J Biol Rhythms 1(2):126-136, 1996, "Temperature sensitivity of the suprachiasmatic nucleus of ground squirrels and rats in vitro." Tang PZ, Gannon MJ, Andrew A, Miller D, Eur J Endocrinol 1995 133(5):598-605, "Evidence for oestrogenic regulation of heat shock protein expression in human endometrium and steroid-responsive cell lines." "HSP 70a and HSP 90 alpha expression were stimulated by oestradiol. Progesterone generally depressed HSP 90 alpha expression and simultaneous addition of both oestradiol and progesterone to the culture medium was antagonistic to HSP 90 alpha expression." Wolffe AP, Glover JF, Tata JR, Exp Cell Res 1984 Oct;154(2):581-590 "Culture shock. Synthesis of heat-shock-like proteins in fresh primary cell cultures." "The isolation of Xenopus liver, lung and testis cells by collagenase digestion of the tissue, followed by Percoll density gradient centrifugation, was characterized by the preferential synthesis of two proteins whose size and charge were similar to 70 and 85 kD heat-shock proteins. The synthesis of these two heat-shock-like proteins, relative to that of total protein, declined gradually in the first 3-4 days after the cells were plated out for primary culture. In fresh primary cultures of liver parenchymal cells albumin mRNA concentration declined rapidly and plateaued at 3-4 days of culture. Freshly isolated male Xenopus hepatocytes were refractory to induction by estrogen of vitellogenin gene transcription but they reacquired hormonal response during the first 3 days of culture. Both of these differentiated phenotypic functions of the Xenopus hepatocytes were quantitatively associated with the decline in synthesis of hsp-like proteins in freshly prepared primary cell cultures. Freshly isolated or heat-shocked hepatocytes exhibited a rounded shape with little intercellular contacts, whereas during the recovery period of 3 days they acquired a flattened shape with a high degree of intercellular and cell-substratum interaction. These results present the first evidence for the preferential synthesis of heat-shock-like proteins by procedures for establishing primary cell cultures. They emphasize the necessity of monitoring normal and heatshock protein synthesis and cell morphology before using primary cell cultures for studying normal regulatory and developmental processes. 11 Wu WX, Derks JB, Zhang Q, Nathanielsz PW, Endocrinology 1996 137(12):5685-5693 "Changes in heat shock protein-90 and -70 messenger ribonucleic acid in uterine tissues of the ewe in relation to parturition and regulation by estradiol and progesterone," "Steroid receptors, including estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR), form associations with heat shock proteins (Hsps). Dissociation of Hsps activates PR, whereas retention of Hsp90 in vitro stimulates ER. Progesterone and estrogen, interacting with their receptors, regulate myometrial contractility throughout pregnancy and during parturition. We hypothesize that uterine ER and PR changes concurrent with changes in Hsp90 and -70 abundance could alter uterine function." "Dramatic tissue-specific increases in Hsp90 and -70 mRNA were observed in myometrium and endometrium (P < 0.05) during spontaneous and glucocorticoid-induced labor. Hsp90 and -70 mRNA localized in myometrial, arterial smooth muscle, and endometrial gland epithelial cells. Estradiol increased Hsp90 and -70 mRNA in myometrium and endometrium of nonpregnant ewes. Progesterone did not affect Hsp90 and -70 mRNA abundance, but inhibited the estradiol-stimulated increase. These data support our hypothesis that at term, increased abundance of Hsp90 and -70 may inhibit uterine PR and stimulate ER function in uterine tissues. Similar changes, if present, would be of importance in species showing no progesterone withdrawal before labor, such as primates, including pregnant women." Zeman EM, Pearson CI, Brown JM, Radiat Res 1990; 122(1):72-76, "Induction of hypoxia in glass versus Permanox petri dishes," "The survival of Chinese hamster ovary cells in culture following graded doses of X rays delivered under aerobic and hypoxic conditions, or treatment with the bioreductive drug SR 4233 under hypoxic conditions, was evaluated as a function of whether cells were plated onto glass or Permanox plastic petri dishes. In the case of treatment with SR 4233, the influence of varying the total volume of medium in the dishes was also studied. While the Permanox petri dishes were sufficient to yield "radiobiological" hypoxia, that is, oxygen enhancement ratios of approximately 3.0 were obtained for X irradiation, they were inferior to glass petri dishes with respect to the hypoxia-selective cytotoxicity of SR 4233. For a 90-min hypoxic exposure to 40 microM SR 4233, the surviving fraction of cells plated on plastic dishes averaged about 50-fold higher than that of cells plated on glass dishes. Although varying the total medium volume did affect the extent of SR 4233-induced cytotoxicity for glass dishes-drug toxicity decreased slightly with increasing medium volume--this was not the case for the plastic dishes, in which the cell survival following a fixed SR 4233 exposure was essentially constant as a function of medium volume. These results suggest, at least for SR 4233, and under these experimental conditions, that Permanox petri dishes are not satisfactory for such studies. "