Ray Peat's Newsletter 
Not for republication without written permission. 
Copyright 2017 Raymond Peat P.O. Box 5764 Eugene OR 97405 May 2017 
Poetry fettered, fetters the human race. Nations are destroyed or flourish 
in proportion as their poetry, painting, and music are destroyed or flourish. William Blake 
Language and Criticism of Science 
In the last 10 or 15 years, several people 
have written about the lack of major transfor­
mative ideas in science since about the middle 
of the last century; risk avoidance, by 
researchers and bureaucrats in the funding 
agencies, sometimes gets all the blame. I think 
other factors are involved, some of which 
affect every aspect of culture and life. 
Science, as art and practice, has been taken 
from individuals and turned into "Big 
Science," controlled by hierarchical organiza­
tions. This has changed the way many things 
work, including medicine and education. 
Doctrines such as the irreversibility of the 
genetic changes which cause cancer, that have 
become an integral part of authoritarian Big 
Medicine, determine the fate of millions of 
people. 
In 1956, C.P. Snow, an English physical 
chemist and novelist, published an article, The 
Two Cultures, in which he contrasted "scien­
tists" and "literary intellectuals." He argued 
that scientists and their technical knowledge 
were responsible for the progress of civiliza­
tion, while the literary intellectuals were the 
equivalent . of 19th century Luddites, 
ignorantly opposing technical progress. His 
view, which he expressed again in 1959 in a 
lecture, was echoed by the mass media, and a 
few years later the critic F .R. Leavis 
responded to his views, describing Snow as a public relations man for the science 
establishment. 
"The governmentalisation of 
science and scholarship is, in part, 
a product of intellectual develop­
ment and its changed relationship 
to technology .... " What Shils 
dido 't discuss openly was that 
huge amounts of public money ... 
were being used, by the Central 
Intelligence Agency, to promote a 
particular ideology of science. 
Beginning right after the second world 
war, government, corporations, and founda­
tions began taking an increased interest in 
science. As funding for research grew, control 
of science moved from the researchers 
themselves to the funding institutions. The 
new discipline of "Science Studies" was 
presented to the public as a natural develop­
ment of the government's traditional role in 
education. Edward Shils, an influential 
professor of sociology at the University of 
Chicago, said "The governmentalisation of 
science and scholarship is, in part, a product 
of intellectual development and its changed 
relationship to technology .... " What Shils didn't discuss openly was that huge amounts 
of public money-starting with money 
diverted from the Marshall Plan for the recon­
struction of Europe-were being used, by the 
Central Intelligence Agency, to promote a 
particular ideology of science. To reconstruct 
science, they had to reconstruct the minds of 
Americans, Europeans, and Latin Americans, 
as a start. 
When non-scientists objected to the way 
the culture was being changed, the CIA, using 
organizations such as Shils' Congress for 
Cultural Freedom, began reshaping the 
humanities so that they would complement, 
rather than conflict with, the culture of Big 
Science. The humanities (languages, 
literature, philosophy, religion, and the arts) 
were a major obstacle in the way of creating a 
new authoritarian civilization. 
The agencies such as the CIA, CCF, and 
the Rockefeller and Ford foundations didn't 
begin by attempting to simply impose a 
uniform ideology in all of these areas; instead, 
they identified individuals who represented 
particular features of their ideology, and then 
created the means by which their attitudes 
could be powerfully disseminated. What had 
been minority extremist views were amplified 
until they constituted the mainstream. In 
biology, Konrad Lorenz's genetic determin­
ism was de-nazified; in literature, philosophy, 
and painting, formalism was glorified. 
They funded journals and conferences that 
extended the new ideology to painting, music, 
language, literature, economics, philosophy, 
religion, social activism, and politics. They 
placed their agents in strategic positions, in all 
the major newspapers in the world, in the 
prestigious old book publishing houses, in 
major mass magazines, in broadcasting, the 
movie industry, and in the universities. 2 
Although only fragments of the CIA' s role 
in creating our new culture have been declas­
sified, there is no doubt about their massive 
involvement, or about their general success in 
eliminating the elements of traditional culture 
that were obstacles to the new order. 
It's possible (for a certain mentality) to see 
this in a positive light, as Thomas Braden 
(head of the CIA's covert operations branch) 
did, after their control of the National Student 
Association was made public: "I'm glad the 
CIA is 'immoral'" (Braden, 1967). One writer 
(Richard Cummings) suggests that the CIA 
might have been responsible for Nelson 
Mandela' s survival in prison-his death 
would have increased opposition to 
apartheid. 
But simultaneously with their cultural 
activities, they were operating assassination 
programs around the world. In 80 institutions 
in the U.S. and Canada, including hospitals, 
prisons, and universities, they operated a 
program called MKUL TRA, which according 
to the Supreme Court (CIA v. Sims 471 U.S. 
159, 1985), involved "the research and devel­
opment of chemical, biological, and radiologi­
cal materials capable of employment in 
clandestine operations to control human 
behavior." They were treating the world like 
an orchard, fertilizing some trees, pruning 
others, and removing unwanted trees and 
weeds. 
Braden's boss, Frank Wisner, described 
their operation (the mass media in particular) 
as his "Mighty Wurlitzer," a juke box that 
would play any tune they wanted. The tune 
they wanted to hear in biology was genetic 
determinism, and in physics, math, and logic, 
it was quantized indeterminacy, the doctrine 
that chance is behind all observed events, that 
meanings are "atomic" or quantized, that 
generalizations can only be statistical. Determinism of genes might superficially 
seem inconsistent with indeterminacy of 
atoms and a practical reality that is only a 
statistical description, but they have in 
common their utility for arguing against those 
who would rock the boat-a meritocracy 
based on survival of the fittest, in which moral 
judgments can have no rational basis, unless 
they affirm what exists. 
Terry Spitzer, a former student of Linus 
Pauling's who was teaching at Oregon State 
University, was one of the many teachers who 
were fired between 1947 and 1949 for having 
a positive view of Lamarck and Lysenko. 
Pauling avoided contact with his alma mater 
for 18 years because of the incident. Biolo­
gists who studied under T. H. Morgan went 
on to successful careers as university profes­
sors if they professed the doctrine of genetic 
determinism. One of them who dissented, 
Carl Lindegren, said that all of his Lamarck­
ian friends lost their teaching jobs in 194 7; he 
made his living as a yeast geneticist for a beer 
company. Another dissenter, Leonell Strong, 
made his living by breeding mice for research; 
his demonstration that "genetically deter­
mined" breast cancer could be reversed was 
thoroughly ignored. 
Long before the CIA and other US funding 
agencies began imposing an ideology, ruling 
classes had used ideology to stabilize their 
secure position in the order of things. The 
idea of a "great chain of being," a detailed 
hierarchic ordering of things, with kings just 
below angels, and with peasants, slaves, and 
savages just a little above animals, has been 
an important feature of "western" culture for a 
long time. Its influence can be seen in Hegel's 
idea of progressive history, and in Darwin's 
belief in superior and inferior organisms 
(including people). Our major science 
journals of the last several decades have 3 
helped to promote the idea of a natural 
genetic aristocracy. 
In the older forms of the ideology, every­
one, as part of an ordered creation, had a right 
to exist (in their place), but social pressures 
such as England's enclosure movement, 
privatizing common lands and forcing rural 
people into cities, led to the development of 
an ideology that reconsidered the idea of 
rights. Malthus was one of the ideologists of 
privatization of the remaining common fields 
and forests; Darwin, accepting Malthus's 
ideology, became the theologian of the 
doctrine of "survival of the fittest," death of 
the less fit, and death of the idea of a right to 
exist. By the beginning of the 20th century, 
chance variation was said to explain the 
variety of living things. "Genes" came to be 
considered the essence of an organism, that 
"programmed" its development, and even its 
behavior, but those genes were acquired in 
the big lottery of existence. 
With this reduction of the essence of life 
to the genes, or the atoms that the genes are 
composed of, knowledge of life is reduced to 
knowledge of genes, knowledge in general is 
reduced to knowledge of the essential parts, 
the atoms. The older ways of knowing, 
whether Aristotle's or Hegel's, referred to 
patterns of the whole system, but 20th century 
philosophers began revising logic to reflect 
the new view of science, and "Logical 
Atomism," in which a simplified "ideal 
language," that could reflect the atomic facts 
of the real world, became the ideal for many 
philosophers, and for most biologists and 
physicists. 
For more than ten years, Bertrand Russell 
argued for logical atomism. An important step 
in his thinking was to separate a thing's 
relations with its surroundings from its intrin­
sic properties, making it possible to consider 
the thing as having a stable identity, regardless of where it is and what might be 
happening around it. Over a period of several 
years, as he changed his thinking from ideal­
ism to realism, he believed that this was 
necessary if a stable, precise language was 
going to be able to correspond exactly to the 
facts in the real world that it was meant to 
describe. 
The hope of constructing an "ideal 
language" that was so important to philoso­
phers early in the 20th century followed from 
an assumption that language is an instrument 
of knowing, and that logic and mathematics 
are ways of ordering that knowledge, and 
expressing it in ways that can be "proved." 
There has been a strong tendency in 
"western" culture, especially among academic 
psychologists and philosophers, to identify 
consciousness with language. For Freud, if it 
wasn't verbalized it was unconscious; for my 
professor of nerve physiology, if an animal 
can't verbalize pain, it doesn't feel it; 
surgeons performing circumcisions on babies 
argued that babies aren't conscious of pain 
until they can talk. 
While Russell and Whitehead were 
moving away from their early attitude toward 
logic, others intensified their belief that 
language was the essence of knowledge, and 
"computability theory" would grow out of 
logical atomism, leading some of its propo­
nents to argue that computers are able to 
produce thinking that's exactly like human 
thinking. Claims of that sort would have 
seemed sane to the earlier generations that 
identified consciousness with language, and 
language with the formalisms of reasoning. 
Although that formalistic view of language 
dominated a large part of the academic world, 
there were people who were studying 
language as it exists in the real world. Franz 
Boas, Otto Jespersen, Ferdinand de Saussure, 4 
Edward Sapir, and Leonard Bloomfield 
contributed to the development of linguistics 
as a science. They studied the development of 
language through time, its function in 
communication, and its internal structure and 
organization. Between 1900 and the 1950s, 
their work defined "linguistics" as it was 
understood in western Europe and the U.S., 
but by the 1960s, students were being taught 
that the traditional approach to the study of 
language had been faulty, and the "generative 
grammar," a theory created by Noam 
Chomsky, in which a system of genetically 
defined rules, a "language organ," produces 
language, became a mania. 
Financed by the Pentagon, Chomsky's 
"linguistics" research was seen as a way to 
improve military "Command and Control," 
with computers programmed to use language 
with great precision. The study of real 
languages was largely relegated to anthro­
pologists and "literary intellectuals." The 
logical atomists' idealized and computable 
language, with government funding, was now 
joining with Konrad Lorenz's doctrine of 
genetically determined behavior, to explain 
how our minds work-if it works in comput­
ers, by algorithms and switches, that must be 
how our brains make language. 
An anthropology student at the University 
of Oregon got her department to sponsor a 
class called "Interdepartmental perspectives 
on the nature of man." We had students in 
several different departments select a profes­
sor to give a lecture on what he felt his disci­
pline's contribution was to the understanding 
of human nature. Shockingly, all of them 
explained in their lectures how transforma­
tional Chomsky's idea of the "generative 
grammar" had been for their discipline's 
understanding of human nature. In a very 
short time, a new ideology had been planted 
and taken root in the university culture. In treating language scientifically, people 
like Boas and his contemporaries considered 
the language in relation to the consciousness 
and intentions of the speaking organism, and 
to the changing culture in which the commu­
nication is taking place. For them, the essence 
of language was communication, and commu­
nication is a matter of modifying the relations 
of individuals with each other and their 
surroundings. When something is communi­
cated, a change occurs in the consciousness of 
the person who understands the message. For 
Russell's logical atomism, it was necessary to 
deny that the relations between things were 
properties of the things, since the precise, 
computable logic was meant to correspond 
exactly to something unchanging in reality. 
When language is seen as an instrument of 
communication, rather than of logic, we look 
for the source of knowing outside of the 
logical forms of language. In the genetically 
determined behavior (constituting culture) 
imagined by Konrad Lorenz, Gunther Stent, et 
al., and the genetically determined grammar 
of Chomsky, et al., genes are defined in terms 
of their impenetrability by events in the 
environment, their unchanged persistence 
through time. Their image of reality is a 
projection of logical atomism onto reality. 
In reality, any event is constantly modified 
or conditioned by all the components of an 
interacting system. The life of an organism is 
always an interaction with its environment, 
and its consciousness of its environment is 
part of its life process. Language is one of the 
ways that we interact with our environment, 
but it only exists against the background of 
our life, and our awareness and orientation to 
the world-the knowledge we have as living 
organisms. 
Openness to experience has been 
displaced by a limited set of explanations in 
the dominant culture. Most people in the U.S. 5 
and western Europe have learned about 
Pavlov's dogs and the "conditioned reflex," 
thinking of it as something that happens on 
the tissue level below consciousness. A false 
translation many years ago created that 
impression. Pavlov's term was "conditional 
reflex," with very different implications. 
Pavlov knew that his dogs were evaluating 
the whole environment, including details such 
as whether or not he was wearing his lab coat. 
They were perceiving patterns, judging 
probabilities, and relating those to their needs 
or preferences. 
For Descartes, the animal mechanism 
operated on the basis of inborn, determined, 
reflexes. For Pavlov, conditional reflexes 
were appropriate, intelligent reactions: 
" ••• under different conditions these same 
stimuli may initiate quite different reflex 
reactions; and conversely, the same reaction 
may be initiated by different stimuli." "So 
infinitely complex, so continuously in flux, 
are the conditions in the world around, that 
complex animal system which is itself in 
living flux, and that system only, has a chance 
to establish dynamic equilibrium with the 
environment." Maurice Merleau-Ponty, 
analyzing biological and medical evidence, 
argued convincingly that the older ideas of 
simple, mechanical reflexes were based on 
misinterpretations and experimental artifacts. 
If we believe that language and logic are 
the source of knowledge, we will devalue our 
own animal intelligence, and in doing this we 
become susceptable to the cliches and 
doctrines that have been deliberately built into 
"our" culture. The dominant culture is an 
interlocking set of acceptable ideas, phrases, 
and defmitions, that has been consciously 
created by advertisers and propagandists, to 
facilitate the exercise of power. Any impor­
tant decision will be made either on the basis 
of accepting the ubiquitous cliches and definitions, or through a process of consider­
ing ulterior motives and judging the quality of 
the evidence, looking for the best evidence. 
Experience, as the source of knowledge, is 
also the basis for criticizing false beliefs, 
which is necessary for knowledge to continue 
its development. 
A computable logic and grammar is 
helpful for efficient "command and control," 
and a culture built on those elements makes 
the population programmable. A complex 
consciousness, "that complex animal system 
which is itself in living flux," on the other 
hand, tends to make autonomous judgments, 
critically examining each situation, to create 
the best solution. 
NOTES and REFERENCES 
Who Paid the Piper? The CIA and the 
Cultural Cold War by Frances Stonor 
Saunders, London; Granta Books, 1999 
Subsidizing Culture: Taxpayer Enrichment 
of the Creative Class, by Jam es T. Bennett, 
Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, NJ. 
The living principle: English as a discipline 
of thought, Frank Raymond Leavis, Chatto & 
Windus, 1975. 
The importance of the Leavis-Snow contro­
versy is that Leavis was neither attacking 
science nor defending literature, but attacking 
the Cartesian dualism that was degrading 
science, language, and civilization. Snow's 
"Two Cultures" had invaded the English 
schools the way Chomsky's "generative 
grammar" did in the US schools. The vacuous 
scientism that Snow called culture was 
nothing but an ideology of power; Snow was a 
mouthpiece for the British imperial 
government. 6 
"The point to be stressed is that, whatever 
was gained by the triumph of 'clarity', logic 
and Descartes, the gain was paid for by an 
immeasurable loss: you can't •.. subscribe to 
the assumptions implicit in 'clear' and 
'logical' as criteria without cutting yourself 
off from most important capacities and poten­
tialities of thought which of its nature is 
essentially heuristic and creative." (Leavis, 
page 97.) 
Thomas W. Braden, "I'm glad the CIA is 
'immoral,"' The Saturday Evening Post, 20 
May 1967, page 10 -14. 
Richard Cummings: January 30, 1986 Issue 
New York Review of Books. Allard Lowen­
stein: An Exchange, Richard Cummings, 
Barney Rasset, Victor Rabinowitz, and 
Sanford Friedman, reply by Hendrik 
Hertzberg. 
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1986/01130/ 
allard-lowenstein-an-exchange/ 
****************** 