 
Ry Peat's Newsletter
 Ideas won't keep; something must be done about them. —Alfred North Whitehead Copyright 2015 Raymond Peat  P.O. Box 5764  Eugene OR  97405 September 2015 Not for republication without written permission. 
Mushrooms--observations and interpretations
 Indigenous people in all the forested parts of the world have eaten mushrooms. England and Spain and their colonies have been notable for their aversion to mushrooms (Norway, Finland, and much of Africa are other mycophobic areas). This has probably affected the way mushrooms have been treated scientifically. Until recently, most mushroom research published in English had focussed on their toxicity, but now there is a rapid increase of publications recognizing their nutritional, medical, and ecological importance. . In the 1970s and '80s many studies showed that even occasional mushroom eating could produce a high incidence of cancers of the stomach, intestine, liver, and other organs in experimental animals. Bela Toth's research showing liver toxins even in the most popular mushroom varieties led me to stop eating them. (Toth was educated in Hungary, a country in which mushrooms had been used in a love potion.) More recently, some studies have shown an impressive freedom from cancer in people who eat them regularly (cooking destroys the toxins in most species). For example, in China patients with breast cancer were much more likely not to have eaten mushrooms than women who ate at least 10 grams of mushrooms daily. Women who had a high intake of mushrooms and also drank green tea were only 11% as likely to have breast cancer as those who ate neither mushrooms nor green tea (Zhang, et al., 2009). When the incidence of cancer and other diseases in different countries is compared, differences in diet are often thought to explain the difference, but the role of mushrooms is seldom considered. If eating mushrooms is in fact extremely beneficial, it's important to understand how they work, and what the implications of increasing their use might be. Particular foods usually exist within an ideology, a context of morality, esthetics, economics, effects on health and ecology, etc. Local communities used to have their own food cultures that regulated the ways foods were produced and used, but colonialism and industrialization have imposed a new ideology of "rationalizing" the production and use of food, arguing for economy of scale, scientific dietetics, and a "free market." The Green Revolution, based on seed monopoly, sale of fertilizer, insecticides and herbicides, and control of water, was imposed by governments and corporations acting together, supported by schools, universities, and mass publicity. Simultaneously, nutritional thinking has been "rationalized" in terms of "essential nutritional requirements," genetically defined. That ideology has formed the background for alternatives such as T.C. Campbell's China Study, arguing that animal proteins cause cancer, and the "small planet" idea that combining rice and beans to make a complete protein could reduce starvation and environmental degradation. Alternative thoughts about food systems are needed, but I think they should incorporate the best knowledge available, rather than just arguing for a particular vegetarian ideology of agriculture or more efficient ways to meet our need for essential nutrients. Traditionally, especially with influences from ancient Hinduism and Jainism, morality has been the basis for vegetarianism, an empathetic dislike for killing and eating sentient or conscious beings. Recently, a psychologist, Diana Fleischman, published a detailed argument that vegans can include oysters or mussels in their diet, because the bivalves' nervous system isn't organized the way other animals' are. She mentions the issue of self-awareness, but cites the opinion of many psychologists that dogs and cats aren't self aware, because they don't recognize themselves in a mirror. (That is a reflection on the mentality of those psychologists.) She argues that oysters lack the ability to suffer, and so can be ethically used for food. Since oysters have eyes, and react to movements in their environment, it can be argued that they are aware of being in the world, distinct from their surroundings, and that their defensive behaviors correspond to a preference for not being eaten. Plants also have holistic defensive reactions to injury or threat, so the arguments of vegetarians sometimes rest on particular doctrines regarding the nature of consciousness. Meat eaters sometimes use the awareness of self or its absence to explain why they will eat most types of animal, while frowning on cannibalism. The dietary customs of a society probably guide that society's beliefs about the awareness of organisms, as much as those beliefs guide its food customs. A good ecological view of nutrition should accommodate some of the existing cultural themes (economic efficiency, avoidance of environmental degradation and cruelty, optimizing health), while taking into account the fact that our human culture and biology are changing, along with changes in the whole planet and its ecosystems. Although plants produce all the amino acids needed by animals, the limited present knowledge and technology aren't sufficient to make a vegan diet both economical and nutritionally adequate-the children of vegan women are often affected by an insufficient supply of protein in particular. Mushrooms have very high quality protein that is easily assimilated, in association with a good balance of other nutrients. Mushrooms and other fungi are, like people, completely dependent on plants nutritionally; plants can make sugar from air, water, and sunlight, and that is the source of the energy that sustains fungi and animals. The cellulose and lignin of dead plants provide the energy for mushroom growth. The not-so-green revolution of industrial agriculture has substituted petroleum for this constantly renewed energy. Living in decaying organic matter, the mushroom mycelium is exposed to a great variety of bacteria and other fungi. Animals have to deal with a similar microbial situation in their intestines. Even though our internal exposure to microbes and their products isn't very massive, it can have fatal consequences, as explained by Metchnikoff. The success of mushrooms in dealing with their microbe-rich environment can help us to understand our own problems of "immunity," the processes involved in maintaining the integrity of our organism. The theory that our immune system consists of mechanisms for distinguishing "self" from "other," and destroying the "other," is being replaced by the "danger theory" of Polly Matzinger and the "damage" or "morphostasis" theory of Jamie Cunliffe. Cunliffe argues that it is the disturbance of our organismic integrity that activates the immune process, not an abstract "otherness." Fungi effectively maintain their integrity without the cellular complexities involved in our multilayered immune system. Much of the thinking about the medicinal use of mushrooms has focussed on the identification of factors that stimulate our immune system, for example by activating cytokines that increase our production of killer cells. The polysaccharides, betaglucans have had the most attention, as activators of the immune system and for use in cancer chemotherapy, for their direct toxicity to cancer cells. Unfortunately, activation of the immune system involves inflammation, and inflammation generally contributes to the loss of organismic integrity. Rather than looking for "drugs" in mushrooms, I think we should be trying to understand the nature of their resistance to potential pathogens, and thinking analogically-can their effects such as preventing cancer result from biological features that we have in common with them? Cell water behaves differently when cells are functionally stable or unstable, being more mobile in cells that are unstable. Substances that act on cell water can modify the stability of the cell. Estrogen, histamine, and nitric oxide increase the "structural temperature" of water, destabilizing the cell, and progesterone, cholesterol, oxygen and carbon dioxide have opposing effects. Several substances in mushrooms probably function as stabilizers, protecting them from destabilizing factors produced by potentially pathogenic bacteria. There is evidence that some of those factors are similarly effective in animal cells, which could explain the wide range of their protective effects. In the 1960s, S.J. Webb found that inositol (a six carbon ring, C6H12O6, with a more rigid form than glucose) protected cells from the destabilizing effects of dehydration and irradiation. Trehalose, a disaccharide like sucrose, but chemically more stable, is one of the main sugars of mushrooms, and it has similar stabilizing effects on cell water. (In the blood and other extracellular fluids, it reduces glycation and lipid peroxidaton.) The stable cell substance is more lipophilic than ordinary water, making fats less likely to separate into droplets inside the cell, and regulating the interactions of proteins, including prevention of their clumping. In degenerative diseases, the clumping of proteins (for example, prion, tau, amyloid, lens crystallin, synuclein, polyglutamine) is an important aspect of cell failure. This impairment of the cell's solvent properties results from an energy source that doesn't fully compensate for stress (a process that leads to excitotoxicity), but simply adding a stabilizing substance such as trehalose can maintain the proper solvation of proteins. Trehalose also increases autophagy (Sarkar and Rubinsztein, 2008, Casarejos, et al., 2011, Emanuele, 2014), a process in which aggregated insoluble proteins are eliminated, which has implications for all the degenerative diseases. In mice it can reverse a nervous disorder, ataxia (Chen, et al., 2015). The way it reduces inflammation, lowering nitric oxide and NF-kB (He, et al., 2014, Noh, et al., 2014, Yurkiv, et al., 2015), is probably a result of its stabilization of cell structure. Although our intestines contain enzymes for turning trehalose into glucose, these are mostly in the lower part of the intestine, allowing some of the trehalose to be absorbed into the blood and into the tissues. When a stressor acts on a cell, the cell takes up water and begins producing nitric oxide, leading to a "phase change" in the cell's physical properties and functions, but this process can be blocked when the stabilizing factors are available. Estrogen, ionizing radiation, hypoxia, carbon monoxide, and endotoxin all increase cell water content and nitric oxide. The activity of nitric oxide synthase is regulated by the state of the cells' structural proteins (Zharikov, et al., 2001), especially the actin filaments, and by causing a shift away from oxidative energy production, the cell persists in that state until functions are restored by the organism's adaptive mechanisms, including the increased delivery of glucose and oxygen to the affected tissues. The steroids progesterone and cholesterol are among the organism's adaptive resources. Excitatory stress causes the aging brain to lose cholesterol (Sodero, et al., 2010). The ester form of cholesterol is increased by excitatory stress (Kim, et al., 2011). The steroids of animals and fungi are produced from the precursor, lanosterol; plant steroids are produced from cycloartenol, a molecule with a slightly different shape. This suggests that fungal steroids might be more compatible with our cells than those in plants. A few people have been concerned about the incorporation of foreign DNA into our cells, but there has been little interest in the cumulative effects of the alien plant steroids. The fact that some plant sterols can block the absorption of cholesterol has led to their use in some dietary supplements. Some plant sterols can interfere with the enzyme that removes fatty acid from cholesterol esters, and there is some evidence that a diet lacking plant sterols can be protective (Wilson, et al., 213). Cholesterol is our basic stability-promoting lipid, which is needed for maintaining the organization of the cell structures, including those involved in cell division. It associates with hydrophobic areas of proteins ("the interaction between cholesterol and peptides is inversely correlated with the extent of the peptide-peptide interactions," Zhao, et al., 2011), and that makes it likely to be a factor in preventing the clumping of proteins in aging and degeneration. In Alzheimer's disease and other dementing conditions, the concentration of cholesterol in crucial brain areas is decreased, (Ledesma and Dotti, 2012, Roher, et al., 2002, Wallin, et al., 1989, Vakulenko, 1980). while the concentration of cholesterol esters increases. The fungal sterol, lanosterol, which is very similar in structure to cholesterol, can reverse protein aggregation in cataracts (Zhao, et al., 2015), and a mushroom extract (containing a variety of related sterols) can prevent the formation of cataracts in vitro (Ganeshpurkar, et al., 2011), preventing the proteins from becoming insoluble, and in living animals the extract reduced cataract formation by 75% (Isai, et al., 2009). Mushrooms have been found to improve learning in animals, and to decrease symptoms of dementia in people (Wang, et al., 2012, Seo, 2010, Mori, et al., 2009). In the 1960s, I heard about the temporary complete recovery of a demented patient at a geriatric hospital in Santee, California. The dy-long episode of mental clarity began after she had been outside on the hospital grounds, and later they found a half-eaten mushroom in her apron pocket. The doctors believed it was a toxic amanita variety. One of the chemicals later identified in the Amanita muscaria species was named muscimol, a GABA analog, which protects against excitoxicity, but that species also contains many other substances that affect nerves. Estrogen has excitatory, anti-GABA effects in the brain (Smith, et al., 2000, Gu and Moss, 1996), and some of the mushrooms' protective effects result from inhibiting aromatase, the enzyme that synthesizes estrogen (Chen, 2002, Chen, et al., 2006), and also from blocking estrogen receptors (Jang, et al., 2015, Jiang, et al., 2006). Enzyme studies show that a variety of molecules in the common white button mushroom contribute to these anti-estrogen effects, and inhibit cancer cell growth (Grube, et al., 2001). Studies in mice showed that an extract of these mushrooms inhibited growth and increased apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells (Adams, et al., 2008). The effects of mushrooms on cancer are parallel to those of progesterone, inhibiting a wide variety of cancer promoting mechanisms. One of the major mushroom sterols, ergosterol, has been identified as an anticancer agent (Li, et al., 2015). Besides the cell-stabilizing trehalose and steroids, mushrooms contain a variety of flavonoids, including some that are found in citrus fruits, such as rutin, luteolin, and apigenin. A high vitamin E content (Vamanu, 2014) might contribute to their anti-inflammatory effects. In England, about 70% of the people still don't eat any mushrooms, and the per capita intake is only about 120 grams per year (Roman, et al., 2006). It seems likely that the development of mycophobia in the English and Spanish empires was a result of the suppression of witchcraft (the use of psychoactive mushrooms for divination and love potions, etc.), combined with the cultural dominance of cities, where mushrooms were scarce In the absence of a traditional mushroom culture, failure to recognize toxic varieties will increase the risk of poisoning. Currently, silibinin, from milk thistle, is the most commonly used antidote for Amanita phalloides poisoning, but other anti-inflammatory and anti-estrogenic inhibitors of prostaglandin and nitric oxide synthesis might be safer. The hydrazine-containing toxins that Toth and others wrote about are destroyed by heat. Since extracts made by boiling the mushrooms for three hours were very active, I think it's good to boil them from one to three hours. 
REFERENCES
 Nutr Cancer. 2008;60(6):744-56. White button mushroom (Agaricus bisporus) exhibits antiproliferative and proapoptotic properties and inhibits prostate tumor growth in athymic mice. Adams LS, Phung S, Wu X, Ki L, Chen S. Cell Biol Toxicol. 2006 Jul;22(4):285-91. Protective effects of beta-glucan extracted from Agaricus brasiliensis against chemically induced DNA damage in human lymphocytes. Angeli JP, Ribeiro LR, Gonzaga ML, Soares Sde A, Ricardo MP, Tsuboy MS, Stidl R, Knasmueller S, Linhares RE, Mantovani MS. Toxicol In Vitro. 2003 Aug;17(4):465-9. Anticlastogenic effect of aqueous extracts of Agaricus blazei on CHO-k1 cells, studying different developmental phases of the mushroom. Bellini MF, Giacomini NL, Eira AF, Ribeiro LR, Mantovani MS. Neurochem Int. 2011 Mar;58(4):512-20. The accumulation of neurotoxic proteins, induced by proteasome inhibition, is reverted by trehalose, an enhancer of autophagy, in human neuroblastoma cells. Casarejos MJ, Solano RM, Gomez A, Perucho J, de Yebenes JG, Mena MA. Nutr Res. 2013 May;33(5):388-96. White button, portabella, and shiitake mushroom supplementation up-regulates interleukin-23 secretion in acute dextran sodium sulfate colitis C57BL/6 mice and murine macrophage J.744.1 cell line. Chandra LC, Traore D, French C, Marlow D, D'Offay J, Clarke SL, Smith BJ, Kuvibidila S. Front Biosci. 2002 Aug 1;7:d1712-9. Modulation of aromatase activity and expression by environmental chemicals. Chen S. Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 15;66(24):12026-34. Antiaromatase activity of phytochemicals in white button mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus). Chen S, Oh SR, Phung S, Hur G, Ye JJ, Kwok SL, Shrode GE, Belury M, Adams LS, Williams D. Neurochem Res. 2015 Apr;40(4):800-10. Trehalose attenuates the gait ataxia and gliosis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 mice. Chen ZZ, Wang CM, Lee GC, Hsu HC, Wu TL, Lin CW, Ma CK, Lee-Chen GJ, Huang HJ, Hsieh-Li HM. Curr Drug Targets. 2014 May;15(5):551-7. Can trehalose prevent neurodegeneration? Insights from experimental studies. Emanuele E. BMC Immunol. 2015 Jun 23;16:38. Mycobacterial glycolipids di-O-acylated trehalose and tri-Oacylated trehalose downregulate inducible nitric oxide synthase and nitric oxide production in macrophages. Espinosa-Cueto P, Escalera-Zamudio M, Magallanes-Puebla A, Lopez-Marin LM, SeguraSalinas E, Mancilla R. Indian J Pharmacol. 2011 Nov;43(6):667-70. In vitro prevention of cataract by Oyster Mushroom Pleurotus florida extract on isolated goat eye lens. Ganeshpurkar A1, Bhadoriya SS, Pardhi P, Jain AP, Rai G. J Inorg Biochem. 2011 Aug;105(8):1066-72. Physiological cholesterol concentration is a neuroprotective factor against fi-amyloid and fi-amyloidmetal complexes toxicity. Granzotto A, Suwalsky M, Zatta P. J Nutr. 2001 Dec;131(12):3288-93. White button mushroom phytochemicals inhibit aromatase activity and breast cancer cell proliferation. Grube BJ, Eng ET, Kao YC, Kwon A, Chen S. The Journal of Neuroscience, 1 June 1996, 16(11): 3620-3629; 17fi-Estradiol Potentiates KainateInduced Currents via Activation of the cAMP Cascade, Gu Q and Moss RL. Neurotox Res. 2014 Nov;26(4):430-9. Trehalose alleviates PC12 neuronal death mediated by lipopolysaccharide-stimulated BV-2 cells via inhibiting nuclear transcription factor NF-κB and AP-1 activation. He Q, Wang Y, Lin W, Zhang Q, Zhao J, Liu FT, Tang YL, Xiao BG, Wang J. Curr Eye Res. 2009 Apr;34(4):264-73. Anticataractogenic effect of an extract of the oyster mushroom, Pleurotus ostreatus, in an experimental animal model. Isai M, Elanchezhian R, Sakthivel M, Chinnakkaruppan A, Rajamohan M, Jesudasan CN, Thomas PA, Geraldine P. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 7;463(4):917-22. Hispolon inhibits the growth of estrogen receptor positive human breast cancer cells through modulation of estrogen receptor alpha. Jang EH, Jang SY, Cho IH, Hong D, Jung B, Park MJ, Kim JH. Oncol. 2006 Sep;29(3):695-703. Int 1 Ganoderma lucidum inhibits proliferation of human breast cancer cells by down-regulation of estrogen receptor and NF-kappaB signaling. Jiang J, Slivova V, Sliva D. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26654. Protective effects of white button mushroom (Agaricus bisporus) against hepatic steatosis in ovariectomized mice as a model of postmenopausal women. Kanaya N, Kubo M, Liu Z, Chu P, Wang C, Yuan YC, Chen S. Science 225(4666): 1032-1034, Inhibition of human estrogen synthetase (aromatase) by flavones, Kellis JT Jr, Vickery LE. Neuroscience. 2011 Jun 30;185:125-34. Increased expression of acyl-coenzyme A: cholesterol acyltransferase-1 and elevated cholesteryl esters in the hippocampus after excitotoxic injury. Kim JH, Ee SM, Jittiwat J, Ong ES, Farooqui AA, Jenner AM, Ong WY. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2012 Jan 1;4:181-94. Peripheral cholesterol, metabolic disorders and Alzheimer's disease. Ledesma MD, Dotti CG. Oncotarget. 2015 Jul 10;6(19):17832-46. Ergosterol purified from medicinal mushroom Amauroderma rude inhibits cancer growth in vitro and in vivo by up-regulating multiple tumor suppressors. Li X, Wu Q, Xie Y, Ding Y, Du WW, Sdiri M, Yang B. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015 Apr 1;308(7):H759-67. Carbon monoxide increases inducible NOS expression that mediates CO-induced myocardial damage during ischemiareperfusion. Meyer G, Andre L, Kleindienst A, Singh F, Tanguy S, Richard S, Obert P, Boucher F, Jover B, Cazorla O, Reboul C. Phytother Res. 2009 Mar;23(3):367-72. Improvof the mushroom Yamabushitake ing effects erinaceus) on mild (Hericium cognitive impairment: a double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. Mori K, Inatomi S, Ouchi K, Azumi Y, Tuchida T. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2014 Oct;36(5):349-54. Benzyl alcohol derivatives from the mushroom Hericium erinaceum attenuate LPS-stimulated inflammatory response through the regulation of NF-kB and AP-1 activity. Noh HJ, Yoon JY, Kim GS, Lee SE, Lee DY, Choi JH, Kim SY, Kang KS, Cho JY, Kim KH. Anticancer Res. 2008 Jul-Aug;28(4B):2129-33. The anti-aromatase effect of progesterone and of its natural metabolites     20alpha-      and  5alphadihydroprogesterone in the MCF-7aro breast cancer cell line. Pasqualini JR, Chetrite G. Biotech. 2012 Mar;2(1):1-15. Recent developments in mushrooms as anti-cancer therapeutics: a review. Patel S, Goyal A. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2009 Jul;30(2):119-29. New insights on the neuroprotective role of sterols and sex steroids: the seladin-1/DHCR24 paradigm. Peri A, Danza G, Benvenuti S, Luciani P, Deledda C, Rosati F, Cellai I, Serio M. Biochemistry. 2002 Sep 17;41(37):11080-90. Increased A beta peptides and reduced cholesterol and myelin proteins characterize white matter degeneration in Alzheimer's disease. Roher AE, Weiss N, Kokjohn TA, Kuo YM, Kalback W, Anthony J, Watson D, Luehrs DC, Sue L, Walker D, Emmerling M, Goux W, Beach T. Proc Nutr Soc. 2006 May;65(2):190-7. Wild-gathered fungi for health and rural livelihoods. de Roman May, Boa E, Woodward S. Mol Biosyst. 2008 Sep;4(9):895-901. Small molecule enhancers of autophagy for neurodegenerative diseases. Sarkar S, Rubinsztein DC. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Mar 2;128(1):206-12. Oriental medicine Jangwonhwan reduces Abeta(1-42) level and beta-amyloid deposition in the brain of Tg-APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Seo JS, Yun JH, Baek IS, Leem YH, Kang HW, Cho HK, Lyu YS, Son HJ, Han PL. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Aug 9;130(3):578-85. A modified preparation (LMK03) of the oriental medicine Jangwonhwan reduces Abeta(1-42) level in the brain of Tg-APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Seo JS, Jung EY, Kim JH, Lyu YS, Han PL, Kang HW. 2010;62(4):476-83. Cancer. Nutr Dietary mushroom intake and the risk of breast cancer based on hormone receptor status. Shin A, Kim J, Lim SY, Kim G, Sung MK, Lee ES, Ro J. Novartis Found Symp. 2000;230:155-68; discussion 168-72. Oestrogen effects in olivo-cerebellar and hippocampal circuits. Smith SS, Hsu FC, Li X, Frye CA, Faber DS, Markowitz RS. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Jun;32(6):1043-53. Cellular stress from excitatory neurotransmission contributes to cholesterol loss in hippocampal neurons aging in vitro. Sodero AO, Weissmann C, Ledesma MD, Dotti CG. 2006 Mar;2(2):152-61. Explore (NY). Can mushrooms help save the world? Interview by Bonnie J. Horrigan. Stamets P. Zh Nevropatol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 1980;80(7):997-1002. [Pathohistologic and biochemical changes in the brain in atherosclerosis and atherosclerotic dementia). Vakulenko NN. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:974804. Antioxidant properties of mushroom mycelia obtained by batch cultivation and tocopherol content affected by extraction procedures. Vamanu E Acta Neurol Scand. 1989 Oct;80(4):319-23. Decreased myelin lipids in Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. Wallin A, Gottfries CG, Karlsson I, Svennerholm L. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Jun;94(6):1505-19. In vitro and in vivo comparisons of the effects of the fruiting body and mycelium of Antrodia camphorata against amyloid f-protein-induced neurotoxicity and memory impairment. Wang LC, Wang SE, Wang JJ, Tsai TY, Lin CH, Pan TM, Lee CL. Toxicol Pathol. 2013 Aug;41(6):880-92. Inflammatory dilated cardiomyopathy in Abcg5-deficient mice. Wilson DW, Oslund KL, Lyons B, Foreman O, Burzenski L, Svenson KL, Chase TH, Shultz LD. Int J Med Mushrooms. 2015;17(4):339-50. The Effect of Agaricus brasiliensis and Ganoderma lucidum Medicinal Mushroom Administration on the L-arginine/Nitric Oxide System and Rat Leukocyte Apoptosis in Experimental Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus. Yurkiv B, Wasser SP, Nevo E, Sybirna NO. Nature. 2015 Jul 30;523(7562):607-11. Lanosterol reverses protein aggregation in cataracts. Zhao L Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 13;458(3):590-5. Flavone inhibits nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity, nitric oxide production and protein S-nitrosylation in breast cancer cells. Zhu W, Yang B, Fu H, Ma L, Liu T, Chai R, Zheng Z, Zhang Q, Li G. **