 
NUTRITION FOR WOMEN  
Fifth edition   
Copyright 1993 Raymond Peat  
P.O. Box 5764  
Eugene, Oregon 97405  
Other books by Ray Peat:  
Mind and Tissue  
Progesterone in Orthomolecular Medicine  
Generative Energy   
I 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Occasionally, I read parts of this book to see 
whether I still agree with the orientation I had when I was 
writing it, and I see that it seems to be far enough ahead of 
the general culture that it has something useful for almost 
anyone. Rather than changing it, I will just add  some new 
information that I have been concentrating on in recent 
years.  
SALT  
On page 90 I mentioned "too much salt" as a cause 
of water retention. That phrase was a lazy gesture recogni  
zing common medical opinion. If you suddenly increase 
your sodium intake, your body will take a day or two to 
adjust, and during that time you will retain a little extra 
water, but after the short adjustment time, you lose sodium 
at the same rate that you  take it in. Under the influence of 
excess estrogen, your body retains extra water, and it is your 
appetite center which should balance that water by making 
you crave extra salt. If you learn to avoid salty foods at 
those times (or if you take a diuretic),  your blood can't carry 
as much water as when it has enough salt, and so the salt 
stays in the tissues, rather than being carried to the kidneys. 
Tom Brewer demonstrated the importance of eating enough 
salt during pregnancy, to maintain adequate blood volu me. 
When salt is restricted during pregnancy, the inadequate 
blood volume doesn't carry enough oxygen and food to the 
uterus to allow full development of the baby, and the 
kidneys secrete a hormone to increase the circulation, 
creating a tendency toward hi gh blood pressure. Following 
Brewer's research, I saw that extra sodium should help in 
other situations involving circulatory inefficiency. 
Premenstrual edema, insomnia, and even high blood 
pressure often respond very well to a little extra                                               II 
 
 
sodium  in the diet. One of the most important effects of 
sodium is that it tends to spare magnesium, which is likely 
to be lost during stress and hypothyroidism. If we eat salty 
foods when we crave them, we are able to retain our 
magnesium more easily. Sodium al so helps to regulate 
blood sugar, for example by improving its absorption 
from the intestine. There is even evidence that sodium can 
spare protein, since, if there isn't enough sodium to 
excrete into the urine to balance acids, the kidneys will 
waste prote in to produce ammonium as an ionic substitute 
for sodium. But I think the most important point to 
remember is that it is essential for maintaining adequate 
blood volume, and that it is almost always 
unphysiological and irrational to restrict sodium intake,  
because reduced blood volume tends to reduce the 
delivery of oxygen and nutrients to all tissues, leading to 
many problems. The emotional tension many people feel 
when they crave salt is, in some cases, the result of 
increased adrenalin, reflecting a real  biological problem.  
OBESITY  
Several years ago, the death of a young physician 
from blood clots, while she was using a linseed oil 
supplement, caused me to realize the urgency of getting 
more information on the toxicity of unsaturated oils into 
an easily u nderstandable form. While I was writing my 
dissertation, more than 20 years ago, I saw that there was 
already abundant research on their toxicity, but 
commercial propaganda for the "health benefits" of the 
"good unsaturated oils" (from seeds, nuts, and fis h) had 
caused many people to overlook their harmful effects. At 
that time, it was clear that they promoted cancer, heart 
disease, and various degenerative diseases, and even 
premature aging. Agricultural research had demonstrated 
that they promoted obesity , and biochemists could                                               III 
demonstrate a specific interference with our most essential 
respiratory enzymes. Although I knew of experiments in 
which rats grew fat according to the degree of uns aturation 
of the fats in their diet, regardless of quantity, and grew 
lean in proportion to the percentage of (relatively 
saturated) coconut oil in their diet, again regardless of 
quantity, I didn't get around to making practical use of 
these facts until I  had spent several months reading the 
whole history of research on the biological effects of 
dietary fats.  
The idea of "essential fatty acids" (sometimes 
called "vitamin F") appeared in the 1930s, as a result of 
tests in which rats developed a skin disease  on a fat -free 
diet, and recovered from the skin disease when fed 
unsaturated fats. (Other researchers at that time observed 
that the rats became hypermetabolic on the fat -free diet, 
as though they were taking thyroid hormone; it was later 
discovered that the unsaturated fats inhibit the secretion 
and transport of thyroid hormones, and block the ability 
of tissues to respond to them.) Shortly after the concept of 
"essential fatty acids" was proposed, another group 
recognized the rats' skin disease as the ty pical changes 
produced by a vitamin B6 deficiency. They fed rats a fat -
diet until the symptoms appeared, then cured the disease 
with a vitamin B6 supplement, without any of the 
supposedly essential fatty acids. The high metabolic rate 
of the rats, on a die t without the inhibitory oils, made 
them e at more, and they needed more vitamins as well as 
more calories. The high metabolic rate of animals fed 
coconut oil simply reflects the fact that coconut oil 
doesn't contain a toxic amount of the anti -thyroid, anti -
respiratory unsaturated fatty acids.  
Americans have a lower metabolic rate than some 
other cultures, and the result is that obesity is a major 
problem in this country. Since farmers had demonstrated 
that coconut oil (though it is cheap) was not good for 
fattening their animals --it made them lean and hungry --                                               IV 
and since cancer researchers showed it could lower the 
incidence of cancer, I began adding it to my diet. At first I 
noticed that I felt warmer after eating it, as if I had taken a 
thyroid supplement. Then I noticed that I was losing 
weight, while eating more  calories than normal, because of 
adding about an ounce of coconut oil to my usual diet. 
After several months, I leveled off at a weight about 15 
pounds lower than my "normal" weight of the previous 26 
years. As some of friends learned what I was doing, th ey 
began eating coconut oil, with the same results. The 
biochemical basis seems clear: The easily oxidized short 
and medium -chain saturated fatty acids of coconut oil 
provide a source of energy that protects our tissues against 
the toxic inhibitory effects  of the unsaturated fatty acids, 
and reduces their anti -thyroid effects. The animal studies 
of the last 60 years suggest that these effects also provide 
protection against cancer, heart disease, and premature 
aging.  Other effects that can be expected inclu de  
protection against excessive blood clotting, protection of 
the fetal brain, protection against various stress -induced 
problems including epilepsy, and some degree of 
protection against sun -damage of the skin. 
While the use of coconut oil makes it possi ble to 
go longer without eating, because its pro -thyroid effect 
increases the liver's ability to store glycogen, frequent 
snacks are still important for helping to lose weight, or to 
prevent weight -gain. The mechanism is partly that smaller 
meals cause les s insulin to be secreted, and insulin turns 
on the fat storage process, and increases appetite. Another 
important mechanism is that the liver provides about 70% 
of our active thyroid hormone, by converting thyroxine to 
T3, but it can provide this active ho rmone only when it 
has adequate glucose. Frequent snacks --for example, 
sipping a few ounces of orange juice about every hour —
keeps the T3 level up by providing glucose to the liver. 
(Snacks shouldn't consist of protein by itself, since protein 
stimulates i nsulin, but not T3, secretion.) TABLE OF CONTENTS  
PREFACE   
V. PREGNANCY AND CHILDREN   
  Age and Pregnancy  .........................   63 
I. HORMONES   Precocious Babies  ...........................   64 
Hormones and Physical States  ............   2 Nutrition -Related Ideas For   Why Prescribe Estrogen?  ....................   10 Mothers  ................................ ......  65 
Some Symptoms of Estrogen Excess  11 Iron Sickness  ................................ .  67 
Estrogen and Sex  ..............................   11 Fertility  ................................ .........   68 
Vitamin E and Sex  .............................   13 Breast Feeding  ...............................   68 
Estrogen and Thyroid  ........................   15 Brain Damage and the Public Health   Thyroid  ................................ ............   16 Protectors  ................................ ...  69 
Progesterone in Orthomolecular   Hyperactivity  ................................ .  71 
Medicine  ................................ ........   18 Flouride  ................................ .........   73 
Dosage of Progesterone  .....................   22   Transdermal Progesterone for   VI. DIETS   Premenstrual Syndrome  ..................   25 Appetite  ................................ ........   74 
Topical Progesterone for Acne  ... . 27 Fasting  ................................ ..........   75 
Progesterone and Body Temperature  28 Coffee. Tea, and Colas  ....................   75 
Breast Soreness. Cystic Ovaries  ..........   29 Natural Vitamins and Minerals -    Any Difference?  ............................   77 
II. STRESS   Additives and Quality  ......................   78 
Blood Sugar  ................................ .....  29 Warning About Supplements  ............   79 
Stress  and Special Nutritional   Vitamin C: Many Effects  ..................   80 
Requirements  ................................ .  31 Interactions  ................................ ...  81 
Sugar and the Pancreas  .....................   32 Cereals, Seeds, and Beans  ..............   81 
Emotional Problems  ...........................   34 Vinegar, Honey, and Fat  ..................   82 
People Diagnosed As "Psychotic"  .........   34 Margarine or Butter  ........................   83 
Cancer Produces Stress  .....................   36 Liquid Oils  ................................ .....  83 
Arthritis and Stress  ...........................   37 Laxatives  ................................ .......  84 
Cortisone  ................................ .........   38 Specific Dynamic Action  ..................   85 
  HCG ................................ ..............   86 
III. AGING   Note for Dieters  .............................   87 
Aging ................................ ...............   39 Popular Reducing Diets  ...................   87 
Menopausal Flushing  .........................   40 Diet Pills  ................................ ........   89 
Similarity of Menopause and   Fat: Ideas For Getting Off A Plateau ..  89 
Cushing's Syndrome  ........................   41 One Woman's Typical Diet for a Day  . 90 
Cholesterol  ................................ .......  42 Swelling Up (Edema)  ......................   90 
Aging Skin  ................................ .......  43 Exercise  ................................ ........   91 
Estrogen and Osteoporosis  .............   44 One Megavitamin Program ...............   92 
Blood Pressure — Vitamin E and   Adapting to a New Diet  ...................   93 
Other Nutrients  ...............................   45 Energy Itself: CrP and ATP  ..............   94 
  General Principles of Good Nutrition  . 95 
IV. SOME DISEASES     Nearsightedness (Myopia)  ..................   47 VII. THE FUTURE   Colitis, Regional Enteritis (Crohn's   Hidden Motives  ..............................   97 
Disease), Inflammation, and Fibrous   Disestablish the Professions  .............   97 
Diseases, and "Collagen Disease"  48 A Proposed Study  ...........................   98 
Heart Disease  ................................ ...  49 Protein and Starvation  ....................   98 
Arteriosclerosis  ................................ .  50 Reasoning About Health  ..................   99 
Polio: A Chronology (or isn't   Dietetics or Nutrition?  .....................   100 
science wonderful?)  .........................   50 Nutrition and Consciousness  . .. 101 
Multiple Sclerosis  ..............................   51 About Feelings  ...............................   103 
Infections  ................................ .........   52 Desire, The Liberator of Sexual   Food Allergies  ................................ ...  54 Objects  ................................ .......  104 
A Note on Glaucoma  ..........................   55 Fertile Pairing  ................................   105 
Insomnia  ................................ .........   55 from "Evolution as Human Sculpture,-  Low Blood Pressure  ...........................   56 1967 ................................ ...........   106 
Skin Feeding  ................................ ....  57   Identifying Deficiencies  ......................   57 APPENDIX   Warburg's Cancer Theory, Cachexia   Some Definitions  ............................   108 
and Thyroid Therapy  .......................   58 Units  ................................ .............   110 
Cancer, Stress, and Nutrition: A   Nutrients: Plant Sources; Places   Summary  ................................ .......  60 Concentrated in Animals;   The Cervical Cancer Scare  ..................   62 Functions  ................................ ....  111 
Asthma, Migraine, Psoriasis  ................   62 Holistic Physiology: A Diagram  .........   112 
  A Note on References  ......................   113 
   PREFACE 
This book is intended for someone who already has 
questions about nutrition, or who feels insecure about the 
knowledge that is now available. I think it will answer many questions, while making you even more critical of the "official" attitudes toward health. Officially, women's nutri tional 
requirements are not generally so different from men's. But all the special circumstances confronted by women in the U.S. haven't been considered by the compilers of official "Recommended Dietary Allowances."  Some of these special 
circumstances that are important for women's nutrition are discussed here, with some general points that have some -
times been overlooked.  
Since this book was published there has been a national 
conference on nutritional problems of women, and there have been articles and symposia on the nutritional effects of oral contraceptives. These "mainline" advances, however, still haven't caught up with the results of research. My recent 
additions to the book are intended to broaden the concept  of 
nutrition and to direct attention to what I consider to be the 
most important problems and possibilities for women.  
Delayed reproduction is one of the "newer conditions" 
leading to new physiological effects in many women. Disease patterns are changing, foods are changing, and the profes -
sions — with their normal 40 year lag between knowledge and 
application — are not able to deal with most of the new 
problems (they don't even deal too well with the old prob-
lems), so we have to become our own experts, learning how 
to find and evaluate useful information, to have an attitude of 
personal responsibility for knowledge as well as for action. The ideas in this book have been described by some as the physiological side of women's liberation, but of course there  
are political implications here too: why should we give privileged status to a profession which commits millions of 
unnecessary hysterectomies or which waits until the last  
quarter of the twentieth century to determine whether surgery 
is the best treatment for acute appendicitis (it isn't), or to the drug companies which fabricate their safety and effectiveness studies" out of thin air, and then hire academic shills to promote their products, or to the food industry which 
adulterates and degrades our foods  with the false excuse that 
this is required for economical mass distribution? Instead of 
giving them a privileged status, their criminal acts should be recognized and treated as such.  
1 
    I. HORMONES  
    HORMONES AND PHYSICAL STATES :   
Suggestions, instructions, and 
possibilities for the Improvement of life.  
   A. Estrogen and the organism . 
When I have observed that estrogen does things to 
consciousness and behavior, as well as to the body, I have heard 
these responses: if you say submissiveness is hor monal you are 
setting the women's movement back a century; if estrogen 
interferes with memory, then why don't IQ tests show women to 
be less intelligent than men? and so on. First, I want to call 
attention to a hidden assumption, namely, that "biological is equivalent to genetic." That is not true, they are not equivalent, 
but geneticists have been remarkably effective in convincing the 
public, and the granting agencies, that biology is ultimately nothing more than genetics. A typical argument for that 
equivalence goes like this: "if you say that an organism is more 
than its DNA you are a Lamarckian, and possibly even a Stalinist, and those ideas were disapproved by Weismann, who cut the 
tails off several generations of mice and showed that it didn't 
influence the inheritance of tails." If you have fallen for that argument (which is repeated from grade school to graduate 
school), read Zamenhof and A.E. Needham (and their references) 
on the transgenerational effects of diet and environmen t. 
Genetics developed in a context of "social Darwinism", and still 
has an ideological bias: consider K. Lorenz and G. Stent.  
Second, I want to point out that men produce estrogen, 
especially under stress such as starvation or alcoholism or liver 
damage. I n a famine, men may even lactate. Third, on the 
question of IQ tests, Dalton has shown that women who are suffering from an excess of estrogen do worse in both mental and physical performance than when their hormones are in balance. 
Women are not distingui shed from men only by having more 
estrogen, as many people (including doc tors) seem to believe. 
Quantitatively, progesterone is the main female hormone, and progesterone improves brain structure and function. The primary 
male hormone, testosterone, has chemical and functional properties of both estrogen and progesterone; this combined 
function gives males a short -term stability (fewer goiters, 
migraines, etc.) but a lack of  adaptiveness in the longer range 
(higher mortality in infancy and old age). The placenta is a central factor in the development of the brain, but there is very little 
known about possible differences between males' and 
2females' placentas, and their effects on such things as the greater 
mortality of male fetuses and the greater variability of males' 
intelligence.  
Estrogen does block memory, according to animal studies as 
well as clinical experience: many of the women I see (especially if 
they have used birth control pills, have had special social 
problems, have eaten a vegetarian or soybean- rich diet, and if 
they have lived in a cloudy region) have very poor memory and a 
"foggy feeling in their head." High estrogen during pregnancy 
causes fetal brain damage and retardation. Too much unsaturated vegetable oil during pregnancy has the same effect. Both of these 
interfere with energy production: wasting oxygen, altering the 
effects of thyroid hormones, etc.  
Estrogen is the hormone for beginnings, a sort of biochemical 
eraser which can eliminate recently recorded information, r estoring 
the underlying primitive capacity for growth. When we are threatened, by injury or aging, we need the capacity for renewal of cells. Estrogen promotes production of prolactin, a protein 
hormone, and its close analog, growth hormone. Ionizing radiation, 
aging, and oxygen deprivation all cause biochemical changes similar to those produced by estrogen. Excessive estrogen (and 
the prolactin excess it induces) can be dangerous. A few biologists 
are talking about a "death hormone" which appears in the pi tuitary 
at puberty — I suspect prolactin (or another estrogen -induced 
peptide) is the hormone produc ing the effects they see. In 
salamanders, prolactin initiates the process of limb regeneration. Various cancers depend on estrogen and prolactin. A variety  of 
substances promote tumefaction, lump formation, growth without differentiation. Rather than being hormones of death, I think of these as "renewal hormones," hormones of potential immortality. 
Anything which produces tissue atrophy will tend to produce 
cancer. The important question is, what will induce differen tiation 
and useful function in cancer cells? There are many substances  
which promote differentiation and oppose the effects of estrogen, and some of these have been found to be useful in cancer therapy. Among the substances opposing estrogen are dopamine and 
nickel, prolactin inhibitors; chalones, the tissue specific proteins 
which inhibit cell division ( and possibly more ephemerally, the 
peptides of memory); the aprotic solvents, DMF and possibly 
DMSO; progesterone and testosterone; thyroxin and iodine; 
magnesium ATP, the stable form of the "biological energy" molecule; vitamin A, a protein -sparing nutrient which promotes 
differentiation, and vitamin E (and the closely related coenzyme Q, or ubiquinone).  
3B. Organism and environment.  
What does it mean to be biologically integrated with our 
environment, or with our experiences of it? For one thing, it 
doesn't imply a closed perfect timeless system; everything 
evolves. We have enough integration and consistency that we can 
survive, but an essential feature of the environment is that it is 
open and unlimited. When our environment shrinks, when there 
isn't enough food, we can adapt, for example by replacing muscle 
with fat and by having small -brained babies (the brain is an 
expensive organ, energetically, though its efficiency increases 
with its expense). When our environ ment meets our needs our  
brains and muscles expand. The lower leg (like the brain) is a good indicator of environmental support: parents who grew up in a population which has atrophied -looking lower legs can have 
children with beau tifully developed legs, when milk becomes 
abunda ntly available. Boas (1912) recorded first generation 
changes in head shape in the children of immigrants. Brain size is 
likewise very rapidly increased with a good diet (or, in rats at 
least, with a more interesting life).  
The brain (and especially its frontal tissue) is like a window 
onto both present and past environments. It saves as much as it 
can of past environments, but particularly, it saves those aspects 
of the environment which seem favorable, which hint at abundance and possibility. The frontal lobes of the brain are like 
the mainspring of a clock: in "hyperkinetic" people, in some 
psychotic and some lobotomized people, the mainspring — the 
energy storing system — is broken or weak: the clock will tick 
only when shaken. The individual with a defe ctive mental energy 
storage system might dash around keeping his mind stimulated, or it might be that coffee or other nerve stimulants will raise the 
level of energy to the point that quiet integration becomes 
possible. The persistence of attention from o ne situation to 
another makes generalization and discovery possible. Given a 
favorable environment, the passage of time leads to the 
accumulation of awareness, to the discovery of new aspects of the environment, new ways of living; it leads to doing thing s more 
intelligently.  
This can be said in physical and biochemical terms: if a 
shrinking environment doesn't interfere, the passage of time leads 
to a brain state which is both more energetic and more efficient. Vital stains show that these energetic changes go with structural 
changes in the cytoplasm, such that high energy efficient metabolism occurs when the cytoplasm has affinity for oily dyes. When water is at a surface it is ordered or structured so that it loses much of its wetness; a bug can walk on it; it contains mor e 
heat (or is colder for a given  amount of heat).
4Water is unusual in its capacity for internal structural 
modification, and for its heat capacity. During cell division, muscle 
contraction, and nerve stimulation, there is  a release of heat 
(followed by an uptake of heat as the muscle or nerve recovers) which cannot be accounted for by any known chemical change. Its 
order decreases with increasing temperature, unless order is introduced by other substances. (The brain has used and 
exaggerated these properties of water.) Biological and environmental influences can modify these substances so that the 
cell water undergoes a "phase transition," analogous to the 
melting of ice. Muscle contraction, nerve conduction, synthetic and secretory activity, etc., appear to be regulated by these phase changes. Cooperative, or holistic, changes of cells and tissues 
are easier to understand from this integrated point of view, than 
from the conventional molecular and atomistic viewpoint.  
These changes in the "solvent," or the intracellular medium, 
will alter chemical reactions — by modifying en zymes and by 
"sequestering" classes of chemicals, much as the aprotic 
solvents, DMF and DMSO, speed and alter reactivity. Following 
these "solvent" ch anges, we should expect the chemical 
consequences to amplify or "institutionalize" those changes. For example, proteins could be modified to produce appropriate patterns of "memory molecules" and "endorphins" (protein fragments having actions similar to m orphine) and chalones. 
Patterns of excitation become stabilized as knowledge, and as develop mental modifications of tissue: growth and aging and 
their ramifications. An excess of estrogen, or other factors inter -
fering with proteolysis, could block the capacity to experience. The difficulty of recalling dreams probably relates to this synthetic (non -proteolytic) parasympathetic dominance during 
sleep.  
The accumulation of aspects of the environment in our tissue, 
modifying our tissue's functioning and its affinity for various substances, is a short -time analog for the general upward drift of 
evolution, and it has presently known and distinct links with inheritance: hormonal influences pass both ways across the 
placenta, and maternal efficiency determines the supply of 
nutrients — e.g., sugar — to the fetus. "Lingering modifications," 
transgenerational influences of the environment, are visible in a 
great variety of organisms and organs, but it is in the brain — the 
environ mental organ — that these Lamarckian effects are so 
visible and so crucial. If we think of the organism as an accumula -
tion of its past environments, we must keep in mind that the accumulation is always occurring as the residue of the past strives to grasp (and to form) new environments. We  do not 
willingly enter and conform ourselves to an undesirable environment.  
5                               C. Stress and politics . 
Stres s will cause a rise in estrogen and a loss of  anti-
estrogens such as thyroid, progesterone, and (in men) 
testosterone. Male apes who are bullied have decreased levels of 
testosterone, and this effect persists long after their environment has improved. The stress of subjugation seems to lead to an adaptation of passivity. Their passivity prevents further injury, but 
we don't know how stressful their contin uing submission is. Hans 
Selye found that the adrenals are a major component of our 
adaptive system. In the first phase of stress,  there is a shock 
reaction (with changes resembling those of estrogen dom inance), 
with injury to various tissues. In the second phase, the adrenals protect the animal, and this protection continues until something is exhausted. By exposing rats to a preliminary stress, Selye found that he could induce adaptation to other, later  stresses — a 
kind of immunization to stress. About 1957, psychologists noticed that a rat could "learn helplessness": if they held a rat until it stopped struggling, it would then die much sooner than a normal rat does when put into a barrel of water. They also found that they 
could "immunize" their rats against learned helplessness, by 
previously allowing them to experience success in a similar situation. The short -term learned helplessness apparently does 
something to block the efficient use of energy, so that the animal 
dies of exhaustion very easily, i.e., it has depleted one source of 
energy without mobilizing another.  
Energetically, the estrogen- dominated metabolic state is less 
efficient than the oxidative state which is dominated by thyroid and progesterone (or testosterone). The estrogen state, like the rats' state of learned helplessness, is "parasympathetic," in the 
sense that many chemical balances have moved away from the 
mobilized "sympathetic" or adrenergic state. The estrogen state, for example, depresses blood sugar, while the mobilized state 
spares glucose by oxidizing fat.  
Since the rats can be "immunized" against becoming helpless 
during restraint, by previously experiencing success, it seems that 
something more is involved than Selye's pre- conditioning. It seems 
to be the meaning of the particular experience of restraint that 
affects the animals' capacity to struggle. The perception of 
possibility, of a vista that extends convincingly toward a better 
future life, seems to modify the metabolic apparatus. Drowning 
rats, it happens, will drown before they discover the liberating possibilities. Successful struggle takes a little while to get 
organized. I suspect that life in a rat -box was an essential factor in 
those experiments, and that a life of reasonable opportunity would prevent such learning of helplessness.  
6Men can be habitually passive, and can also have an 
excess of estrogen, so I am not implying (when I talk about the 
estrogenic state) either that the male sex is necessarily the 
source of human oppression nor that women invite their own 
subjugation by a hormonal predisposition. I do want to suggest that the hormonal conditions for easy subjugation are alterable, 
within the individual, from generation to generation and that 
better social conditions can improve our physiologies. High estrogen traits can be both acquired and passed on to 
offspring, as discovered by L.C. Strong in his mice, and as 
confirmed recently in rats that were stressed during pregnancy . 
I also want to point out that, within some privileged classes,  
women as well as men seem to actively promote their own role 
of passivity, relative to their men, probably because they sense that their position (and their children's) is threatened by 
widespread social and sexual change. Of course, men of 
various  classes also encourage their women to be dependent, 
but my point is that historical and class processes are involved, 
and must be understood by those who want to improve human 
relationships. J.W. Prescott showed that, in all the societies he investigated, an inferior status for women was associated with 
sexual repression, self -mutilation, mystical -religious attitudes, 
militarism, and a hierarchical class system. Prescott suggests a 
two-state system in the brain, such that people do all those 
unpleasant things when they grow up deprived of pleasure. Interestingly, forty years earlier J.D. Unwin, a Freudian anthropologist who (unlike Prescott) favored repression, 
militarism, etc., came to the same conclusions. Behavior 
affects the hormones, and hormones influence behavior. Life in a rat- box society makes brains grow smaller, and makes 
people do the things that maintain the oppressive conditions. Nutritional and hormonal social intervention can change this.  
     D. Pleasure and hormones . 
The first time I took enough desiccated thyroid to make my 
heart speed noticeably, there was a pleasure pushing up from my abdomen through my chest, making me want to smile and 
laugh. When I have watched suicidal women using thyroid or 
progesterone, there is a transformation (under an hour with progesterone, a few hours or longer with thyroid) from weeping 
to smiling and laughing; they speak of un bearable pain being 
replaced by pleasure. Women who have had orgasms while taking thyroid have lost their sexual responsiveness when they 
stopped. A woman said, soon after she began using 
progesterone and thyroid, that, for the first time in her life she felt that her heart and abdomen were  
7opening with feelings of love. Another said "thyroid is love." Since 
these women were using the hormones for problems that had 
developed gradually, over several years if not their entire life, the 
sudden change was dramatic. They had forgotten that life itself was pleasurable. Our culture doesn't explicitly teach us that life is pleasureless, though it does make life pleasureless for many, and it 
does teach that pleasure is worth less than virtue, utility, 
possession, etc. By improving life conditions (in many ways) the hormones of pleasure can have a bigger role in our physiology. I think the experience of pleasure (whatever capacity for pleasure 
there is) increases the ability to experience pleasure, but I don't 
offer this with much hope as a therapeutic approach, since I 
know of people who say that running to exhaustion makes them "feel good" — neither "feeling good" nor "having orgasms" has a 
clear meaning, at present.  
                                   E. Nutrition and brains.  
In regions where most people die before the age of five, 
those who do grow up are severely malnourished, and have 
brains that are much smaller than normal. Studies in Latin 
America  have compared brain size and neurological 
development in villages eating "normally," and in nearby villages in which pregnant women and babies received a small nutritional 
supplement, and have shown that head size (and mental 
development) can be increased  by a little improvement in the 
diet. Animal experiments, as well as a recent study of Americans, show that this improvement could be cumulative, if 
continued into the next generations.  
Additionally, when the mothers' general health is so poor that 
nutriti on just during pregnancy can't overcome the lifelong 
deprivation, the use of hormones could keep the mother in good 
health during pregnancy, and act as a buffer between the fetus 
and the mother's metabolic instability. In some areas, thyroid 
hormone would be crucial. In every area, for a large percentage of women, progesterone can improve gestation . Thyroid 
supplementation would cost only about $2 per pregnancy, 
progesterone would cost from $2 to $15. The difference 
between a passive person with an 85 IQ and an independent 
person with a 130 IQ  is very great; if all the children in a village 
could be so healthy, many aspects of the society would change. I suppose this explains why none of the people who give money for 
research or humanitarian projects has bee n interested in 
supporting such a project. With adequate support, many foods could be evaluated for their effect, positive or negative, on 
gestation and brain development. 
There is a medical myth about large- headed babies  
8being hard to deliver. When the pelvis is seriously deformed, 
there is a problem, but the fact is that very large babies are 
delivered with great ease when the mother is in good health, because the factors which support growth of the baby also 
promote elasticity of the mother's tissues. Progesterone is such a 
factor — almost a "chemical obstetrician."  
It has been observed that the ratio of brain weight to body 
weight corresponds directly to longevity. The brain has a nourishing, trophic influence on other tissues. A stable, efficient brain is an anti -stress agent. The hormones of stress age 
various tissues, including the brain, and the collagen in 
connective tissue. Good nutrition, including the anti -stress 
substances found in certain foods, will simultaneously optimize 
intelligence and increase the healthy life- span. Congenital 
defects are increased by stress and poor nutrition during 
pregnancy, and reduced by good nutrition, hormone 
supplementation, and stress reduction. Even in rich cultures, protein deficiency, inappropriate exercise, and emotional tension will contribute to premature aging of the individual, and damage 
to the offspring.  
       F. Long- range order.  
There is a continuity from the molecular level through our 
physiological states into our way of life. The properties of water, 
modified by biological substances and biological experience, allow a kind of physiological (and epistemological) unity which is 
unimaginable for the atomistic genetic determinists. The 
existence of long -range order in a liqu id is now respectable, 
because liquid crystals are in common use for watch dials and calculator display devices. Long -range order is a principle of 
biological thinking which brings us into a new phase of theory. Succeeding in biology, this principle can help us to re -evaluate 
other events in the history of ideas about physical state. For example, it is now clear that Polanyi's adsorption potential was a fact, and Einstein and Haber were dogmatically wrong in their ideas about inter -atomic forces. Seeing this, we should question 
the many consequences of the same mistaken atomistic view, including Einstein's theory of photoelectricity, which attributed a 
corpuscular quality to light, because he "knew" that matter was 
strictly particulate without any of the long- range energy 
properties that were later demonstrated by Polanyi.  
Biology is now approaching a time when it will be 
increasingly frustrated by the inability of chemists and physicists to think clearly about the assumptions they have  
9made.  A few physical scientists have begun to realize that 
concepts developed in biology can solve problems in, for 
example, the physics of absorption. Thinking about life, our 
assumptions should be fewer and less arbitrary than in simple sciences.  
When we speak about "our mental state and our phy sical 
state," we may eventually achieve the concreteness and 
generality which a physicist has in describing, e.g., "the solid 
state," but this will be an expansion of physics, not a reduction of biology.  
WHY PRESCRIBE ESTROGEN?  
Millions of women with already high estrogen levels are being 
sold estrogen pills or injections, often prescribed as treatment for 
symptoms known to result from excess es trogen. When this 
treatment fails, and symptoms get worse, a tranquilizer i s often 
added to the treatment. Surgery frequently follows. Many healthy 
wombs are removed as a "preventive" measure. I have talked to 
many women who have been ravaged by this kind of medical treatment; asking them how their "low estrogen" had been diagnos ed, they say "by a Pap smear," or "he could tell by 
looking at my eyes," or even vaguer methods. I have only talked to one woman who had her blood estrogen level actually measured.  
Controlled scientific studies don't play much of a role in the 
practice of medicine. This widespread use of estrogen is not 
only unsupported by such valid studies, but is in opposition to 
most of the real data that exist. Foreign physicians have asked 
how it was possible to speak of "hormone replacement therapy," when the estrogen level in the blood was often maintained at 
1000 percent of normal.  
Hepatitis and other liver problems are known to be 
increasing. Women's livers are known to be more sluggish than 
men's in removing chemicals from the body. When the liver doesn't remove estrogen from the body rapidly enough, 
estrogen accumulates in the body — this is why male alcoholics 
often grow breasts. Estrogen pills and tran quilizers add to the 
liver's burden. Poor nutrition makes it impossible for the liver to function properly.  
It has been known for several decades that many of the 
symptoms of hormone imbalance can be relieved with simple 
nutritional therapy. If doctors don't want to take the time to study the literature, they should at least be referred to one of the 
simply writte n articles, such as Biskind's on the liver and 
hormones in Vitamins and Hormones , 1946.  
10SOME SYMPTOMS OF ESTROGEN EXCESS  
In a recent nutrition class, a young woman who prepared 
nutritionally perfect meals (even exceeding the established 
"recommended daily allowances") was getting ready to have 
breast surgery, because for two years she had had painful cysts. 
One of the things  we discussed was a 1946 paper by Biskind on 
estrogen and the liver, in which it was pointed out that a B 
vitamin deficiency slows the liver's elimination of estrogen, so 
that it accumulates in the body, producing a series of classical symptoms, including cystic mastitis.  
During the course, we had also discussed how vitamin A can 
often benefit secretory tissues, such as the glands which maintain hormonal balance.  
The last day of class, she told me that, for the first time in two 
years she had no breast pain, and her doctor had told her she was 
completely free of the cystic condition, and called off the surgery.  
The other symptoms mentioned by Biskind include adrenal 
cortex hypertrophy, uterine bleeding, premenstrual tension, diminished libido and impotence i n the male  and cutaneous 
vascular spiders. He mentions that the diminished testicular 
function of diabetes can be improved by nutrition, as can an 
enlarged liver, and that PABA sometimes improves the libido. He 
wrote that thiamine and riboflavin seemed to be responsible for 
the liver's regulation of estrogen, but that the amino acid 
methionine was also essential. Lipschuts (Ster oids and Tumors, 
1950) reported that protein is crucial for estrogen removal. Recent 
studies in monkeys show that menstruation is brought on when 
the progesterone level falls and the uterine blood vessels dilate, 
then go into spasm. Many of the symptoms of estrogen excess are equivalent to those of a progesterone deficiency. 
Progesterone is a direct antagonist of estrogen; Lipschuts (and 
Korenchevsky) have shown that progesterone causes regression 
of tumors induced by estrogen. Thyroid hormone and Vitamin A 
promote protein metabolism and antagonize some of es trogen's 
effects. In fact, hyperthyroidism is known to be able to cause 
estrogen levels to fall below normal. Vitamins C and E are also 
known to help the liver deal with toxins. Puffiness, usually most noticeable in the face in the morning and the feet at night, is another common symptom of estrogen excess, caused by the 
retention  of water and sodium.  
      ESTROGEN AND SEX  
Masters, the sex researcher, recently mentioned that quite 
a few women have been losing their ability to have an orgasm 
after being on the pill for 18 months or longer, and  
11that they are al so losing their interest in sex,  or their ability to be 
aroused easily. Since this doesn't happen to everyone, and 
takes a fairly long time to develop. We can probably understand 
it best by considering other effects of the pill that develop slowly. It's well known that taking estrogen can cause the blood 
to clot too easily. Other effects include anemia, low blood sugar, and slow functioning of the liver.  
Some people will say that the pill inhibits estrogen 
production, and that the loss of sex interest means that these 
women need more estrogen. However, the other effects produced by the pill are pretty clearly the result of an excess of estrogen, at least in relation to other hormones. And I think it 
might be dangerous to increase the dosage of estrogen hoping t o 
restore normal sexual function.  
Normally, the liver treats estrogen like a poison , removing 
it immediately from the body. If the liver gets sluggish from malnutrition or too much estrogen (or other damage), it can allow the hormone to build up to very high levels. Since estrogen is metabolically antagonistic to progesterone and testosterone, i think the pill might decrease libido by coun -
teracting these other hormones. They raise the energy charge of cells, and contribute to a sense of well- being. Testo sterone 
stimulates sexual desire in both sexes. The energy charge of cells can govern nerve reflexes, and so I think it is reasonable 
to suppose that the quality of sexual arousal and orgasm could be influenced by the relative balance of estrogen and proge sterone or testosterone.  
An I.U.D. (intra -uterine contraceptive device) is known to be 
"luteolytic", meaning it suppresses progesterone formation and leads to a relative excess of estrogen. This suggests that I.U.D.s might also eventually make it hard to have orgasms. Copper 
seems to be synergic with estrogen, and could have a similar 
effect — could this have something to do with the de- emphasis 
of sex among some vegetarians who eat lots of copper -rich soy 
beans? Copper I.U.D's would seem the most likely kind to interfere with sexual satisfaction.  
My impression (from women I have known) is that excessive 
estrogen will first produce little orgasms , with a need to have 
many in succession. The low blood sugar resulting from high estrogen can cause depression, i rritability and sleep problems. 
When a lower ratio of estrogen to the other hormones exists, i 
think the pattern is more likely to be one large, intense orgasm 
followed by sleep, with the next arousal not coming for about 1 and one half hours. 
If a person (especially, though not necessarily, a woman) 
has unsatisfying orgasms , or no orgasms at all
, i think it would be 
advisable to eliminate the possible causes of a hormone imbalance (including high copper intake), and also to help the liver function 
as effectively as possible by getting good nutrition.. High protein, all the B vitamins, 
12vitamins A,C, and E, and zinc and magnesium are especially 
important. Vitamin E does several things biochemically which are 
exactly the opposite of what estrogen does, so it has been called 
the "anti -estrogenic vitamin." 
Magnesium has a very powerful sedative — even an esthetic 
— effect, which seems to be especially favorable to healthy 
sexuality. I suspect that it will eventually be known as an "anti -
estrogenic mineral," and, with zinc, may turn out to be effective in a wide variety of sex -related problems. It is already a 
traditional therapy for prostatitis. Male impotence as well as 
female sex problems can sometimes benefit from special 
nutrition.  
According to S. Zuckerman (1955), excess estrogen causes 
enlargement of the prostate in dogs. More recent studies have used progestins to relieve prostate enlargement in men. These 
observations suggest that excess estrogen may be a frequent 
factor in m ale sexual problems. I now suspect low thyroid is a 
factor in most such cases, and advise the elimination of nuts, 
beans, broccoli, corn oil, and other thyroid inhibitors from the diet.  
                                    VITAMIN E AND SEX 
In another section on estrogen, I mention that too much 
estrogen seems to interfere with sexual responsiveness and 
orgasm, and I suggested that a tendency to have a series of small or only partly satisfying orgasms could result from an 
excess of either estrogen or copper, since copper and estrogen 
have some biochemical similarities and interac tions. While zinc 
can counteract copper, many of the effects of estrogen can be 
offset by vitamin E. (Vitamin C can also detoxify and help to 
excrete metals.)  
Estrogen seems to increase the body's need for vitamin E , 
as it does for many other nutrients. Pregnancy, which can leave the woman with an elevated estrogen level, seems to raise the 
amount of vitamin E needed to sustain the following pregnancy, if 
we can generalize from animal experiments. During the first year of a rat's life, the amount of vitamin E needed to sustain 
pregnancy increases by about 65 times (J. of Clinical Nutrition, 
Sept. 1974).  
Just as too much estrogen causes sterility, it seems that it 
can also cause loss of sexual "capacity". Since vitamin E can often restore fertility (e.g.. E.V. Shute, J. Endocr. 2, p.173, 1940), it is 
likely that it can also sometimes restore the libido. 
Newborn rodents often respond to stimulation with the 
behavior of a mature female in heat, and this doesn't seem to be produced by estrogen. Rather, it seems to be produced by the 
slight oxygen deprivation at birth. My own experiments have shown that vitamin E tends to raise the oxygen content  
13of tissues, at least when the tissue is under the influence of 
estrogen. I suspect that estrogen acts largely through its effect 
on oxygen metabolism — a sort of biochemical breath- holding. 
For certain nerve systems, both taking vitamin E and having an orgasm might be compared to taking a good deep breath.  
To continue the analogy between breathing and orgasm, 
having an orgasm without enough vitamin E would be like sneezing without first inhaling. Some people really do this, and the effect is a series of very small, quick sneezes. That is, if the nerve- muscle system can't get into the "ready state" the tension 
can't resolve itself normally. (This "ready state" of the tissues has been studied in the Soviet Union more than in the U.S.; I describe these studies in my book Mind and Tissue).  
Vitamin E preserves ATP;  ATP is a source of biological 
energy, but it also stabilizes or relaxes tissue. This energized relaxation is the "ready state." In a dead animal, ATP disappears from the tissues and the muscles contract and harden, but if  ATP 
is injected the muscles will become soft again. In a vitamin E 
deficiency, certain tissues lose enough ATP that they can't 
function normally. Muscles cramp, and eventually can harden and 
become dystrophic. Magnesium also helps to maintain ATP 
levels, and for example can be used to stop menstrual cramps. In 
an extreme case of vitamin E deficiency, reflexes become abnormal; in some animals, softening of the brain is the first symptom of a vitamin E deficiency. 
The highest part of the brain, in evolution,  is the expec -
tancy/planning system in the frontal lobes. Delayed and appropriate response is impossible if these lobes don't function well. In a healthy animal, arousal means expecta tion: the longer 
arousal can be sustained without distraction, the highe r the 
energy charge will be, and the more intense and satisfying the completion will be.  
Trying to sustain excitement too long, for example while 
waiting for your partner to finish an elaborate preparatory ritual, can exhaust the desire, the emotion and tension; the expectancy pattern fades. Losing sleep, or getting too hungry can have the 
same effect by causing low blood sugar. The brain needs a large 
supply of glucose to function well. Incidentally, oversleeping can cause the blood sugar to fall. High estrogen can also cause low blood sugar.  
People have always suspected that sexual desire was  part of 
the highest human functioning. The expectancy process in the most uniquely human part of the brain is as essential for good sex 
as it is for good art or good science. Adequate nutrition, including 
vitamin E, is extremely impor tant for the full fu nctioning of this  
system.  
14      ESTROGEN AND THYROID: A NOTE FOR PHYSICIANS  
The idea of physiological compensation is sometimes 
overlooked in interpreting endocrine interactions, with confusing 
results. The brain- pituitary system (not just  the hypothalamus, 
since the whole brain and sensory system participates as "reflex 
setter") is probably the main regulatory or compensating system. 
If estrogen is injected into an animal, the level of thyroid stimulating hormone rises (Brown- Grant, J. Endocr. 35, 263, 
1966). This should be taken as a hint that the peripheral effect of estrogen can be compensated for by thyroxin. If thyroid functioning is borderline, it would also suggest that elevated 
estrogen might be uncompensated peripherally. There are many 
known examples of metabolic or functional opposition of estrogen and thyroid. 
 Blood Sugar  
Estrogen lowers blood sugar by stimulating insulin release 
(Goodman and Hazelwood, J. Endocr. 62, 439, 1974), and also 
apparently  by blocking the synthesis of adrenal corticoids 
(Turner, General Endocrinology, Sanders Co., Phila., 1966), 
while thyroxin raises blood sugar (Turner, ibid.).  
 Fat Synthesis/ Lipolysis  
Synthesis of lipids is promoted by estrogen (Peat and Soderwall, 
Physiol. Chem. and Physics 4(3), 295, 1972), while thyroxin promotes 
lipolysis possibly acting through adrenalin (Turner, op. cit.).  
                             Liver Catalase Activity  
Reflecting an altered respiratory pattern, liver catalase 
activity seems to be lowered by estrogen (Adams, J. Reprod. 
Fertil. 12, 9, 1970) and raised by thyroxin.  
    Proliferative Response of Lymphoid Organs  
The proliferative response of lymphoid organs, measured as 
the rate of DNA synthesis, is increased by estrogen or insulin and decreased by thyrotropin (Maor, et al., Acta Endocrinol. 75(1), 205, 1974).  
  Size of Thymus  
Apparently thymolysis  is blocked by thyroxine, and promoted 
by estrogen (stress, radiation and starvation also cause thymus 
shrinkage).  
15Lactation  
 
 Starvation and injection of estradiol both suppress lactation 
while thyroxine injection stimulates lactation ( Oshima, Bull, Natl. 
Inst. Anim. Ind (Chibal) 26, 45, 1973).  
Opposing effects of these hormones are also seen in fever 
and thermogenesis, in fertility (Peat, dissertation Univ. of 
Oregon 1972; Harrison et al., Principles of Internal Me dicine, 
1950), and in  methionine metabolism (Finkelstein and Harris, 
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 159 (1), 160, 1973). Brown -Grant, J. 
Physiol. 176, 91, 1965) has commented on the idea of 
compensatory cycling of thyroid activity: " . . . the sudden drop 
in thyroid activity during m etoestrus and dioestrus could well be 
a compensatory decline below the mean level, resulting from the release of an excess of hormone above the needs of the animal during oestrus." The data showing peripheral opposition of the 
hormones suggest that the need for thyroxine varies with the 
estrogen cycle. The fact that myxedema is 5 times more frequent in females (adult) than male also suggests such an 
effect of estrogen (Harrison, op. cit., p. 611). Water and sodium 
retention induced by estrogen (Korenchevsky , Physiol. and 
Pathol. Aging, Hafner, N.Y. 1961) may be hard to distinguish 
from the water retention of myxedema. Iodine, protein and 
electrolyte balance should be given special attention in women who may have an estrogen imbalance.  
THYROID  
Thyroid hormone  is necessary for respiration on the cellular 
level, and makes possible all higher biological functions. Without 
the metabolic efficiency which is promot ed by thyroid hormone, 
life couldn't get much beyond the single -cell stage. Without 
adequate thyroid, we become sluggish, clumsy, cold, anemic, and subject to infections, heart disease, headaches, cancer, and many other diseases, and seem to be prematurely aged, because none of our tissues can function normally. Besides 
providing the respiratory energy wh ich is essential to life, thyroid 
hormones seem to stimulate and direct protein synthesis. 
In hypothyroidism there is little stomach acid, and other 
digestive juices (and even intestinal movement) are inadequate, so gas and constipation are common. Foods aren't assimilated 
well, so even on a seemingly adequate diet there is "internal 
malnutrition." Magnesium is poorly absorbed, and a magnesium deficiency can lead to irritability, blood clots, vascular spasms and angina pectoris, and many other problems. H eart attacks, 
hardening of the arteries, and both high and low blood pressure can by caused by hypothyroidism.  
16 
"Spotting," "breakthrough bleeding," and abnormally long 
periods are often caused by hypothyroidism. In the light of this 
knowledge, i feel that a physician who advocates removal of the 
uterus for excessive bleeding, without first trying thyroid therapy, 
is not practicing medicine properly.  
Low body temperature (below 98 degrees when you wake in 
the morning) and slow pulse are the simplest indicators of hypothyroidism. Foolishly designed blood tests have caused 
many people to be taken off thyroid medication, in spite of their 
symptoms. For 40 years, time after time one blood test has displaced another, and always the one which is  in use at the 
moment is "the correct" one. The oldest test,  the BMR, is still the 
best, in spite of the possibility of a mistake if the test is given when the patient has an infection, but the temperature is also a reliable 
indicator  (except that heat from the environment — an electric 
blanket or a hot room — can artificially raise temperature to 
normal.)  
Cysteine, an amino acid which is abundant in muscle and liver, 
happens to block synthesis of the thyroid hormone.  When we are 
starving or under stress, cortisone causes  these protein- rich 
tissues to be consumed. If metabolism continued at a normal rate, 
stress or hunger would quickly  destroy us. The cysteine which is 
released from muscle,  though, inhibits the thyroid, so metabolism 
is slowed. Cortisone also inhibits the thyroid. Any stress, including 
heavy  exercise, will cause this protective slowing of 
metabolism. The slow heart beat of runners  is largely the result of 
this adaptive hypothyroidism. When we eat large amounts of  muscle 
meats or liver the hi gh concentration of cysteine suppresses 
the thyroid. Heart,  eggs, skin (gelatin) and milk are more favorable to 
the thyroid. Other anti -thyroid foods  are peanuts, soybeans, raw 
cabbage, radishes, broccoli,  cauliflower, unsaturated oils (such  as 
safflower, corn, cottonseed, and soy oils), and an excess of iodine. 
Amygdalin (nitrilosides, laetrile) which occurs in many nuts, 
seeds and  grains, is also a thyroid inhibitor. Because iodate is used 
as a "dough conditioner" (to make bread water -heavy), the American  
eater often gets ten times more iodine than is  recommended. 
Combined with unsaturated oils, as organic iodides, excess iodine can 
powerfully inhibit the thyroid. Manganese is needed to synthesize 
thyroxin, so a deficiency can interfere with thyroid function (coffee is a 
major source of manganese, and caffeine also stimulates the thyroid).  
When a baby is being born, or when a person is exper -
iencing other stress, such as an infection, or when a person  
gets old, the best known thyroid hormone, thyroxine, is not 
changed to the more highly active form, T3 (triiodothyronine)  in 
the normal way. In these emergency conditions, reduced 
oxygen consumption is a useful adaptation, since the blood  
17is poorly oxygenated. Eating carbohydrate stimulates thi s 
conversion, so many additional calories of carbohydrate can be 
eaten without causing a weight gain (reviewed by C. Martin, 1978). Many people whose thyroid gland is sup pressed by 
stress cannot respond to synthetic thyroxine, T4, since the 
same stress ca n block its conversion to T3. Natural thyroid, 
USP, is the most generally effective, but a non -prescription 
thyroid tablet is available at many health food stores.  
Contrary to popular ideas about thyroid, the gland will 
resume its functioning after stopping the use of a supplement 
even if it has been suppressed, and sometimes taking thyroid will increase the gland's function to normal. Taking thyroid will 
sometimes help thin people gain weight, by improving protein 
metabolism, and it often helps people to s leep more soundly.  
PROGESTERONE IN ORTHOMOLECULAR MEDICINE  
In several ways, both progesterone and thyroid can be 
considered as primary regulatory hormones. Both of them 
regulate metabolism directly at the energetic and synthetic 
levels, both have a normalizing, anti -stress action on the 
pituitary, and each has a promoting action on the other. Both are 
blocked (or consumed) by stress, and promoted by light, and by good nutrition. Both oppose the effects of stress, and facilitate 
nutrition. Both are nutrients in cultures which eat the whole 
animal, including ovaries and thyroid.  
Disregarding most of the information promoted by 
pharmaceutical companies, and the medical texts and journals which for thirty years have reflected the opinions of those 
companies (especially regarding the patented synthetic 
estrogens and glucocorticoids), we can trace a line of research and ideas on the sex hormones, from pioneers such as Loeb, 
Korenchevsky, and Selye, through a generation that continued to 
demonstrate the toxicity of estrogen, and the value of progesterone, including people like Lipschutz, Dalton and 
Soderwall. In my dissertation research under Soderwall, I had the 
opportunity to collect and assimilate data indicating an increased 
estrogen effect in aging animals, and recently, using 
radioimmunoassay for  serum estrogen and progesterone, I have 
found a similar change in menopausal women, and Terry 
Parkening, who also studied under Soderwall, has used that 
technique to show that senescent infertility in mice is also 
associated with an increased ratio of estrogen to progesterone. My research showed that the probable mechanism by which 
estrogen excess causes infertility is through limiting the 
availability of oxygen. I showed that anti -estrogenic substances, 
such as progesterone or vitamine E, increased the ox ygen 
tension in  
18the uterus. This anti -oxygen effect of estrogen suggests a 
convergence of reproductive aging research with Warburg's 
theory that damaged respiration is the primary defect in cancer, 
and also with Selye's observation that estrogen's effect 
resembles the first, shock phase of the stress reaction.  
Early research had also shown that estrogen diminishes 
hepatic glycogen (Brunelli, 1935), while progesterone in creases 
both blood sugar and liver glycogen (Gaunt, et al., 1939). It i s well 
known that hypoxia damages the fetal brain, but probably less 
well known that hypoglycemia, either chronic or acute, can cause brain damage and retardation. Hypoxia, by lowering 
metabolic efficiency, will cause hypoglycemia. Estrogen causes 
hypoxia at every imaginable site, from lung, through vascular 
fibrin and extracellular collagen and edema, to intracellular metabolism. Estrogen is also synergic with insulin, lowering blood 
sugar and promoting fat synthesis. Estrogen, and another 
common respirato ry toxin, excessive unsaturated fats, have both 
been demonstrated to cause the birth of small -brained, retarded 
animals. Recent studies imply that about half of the children 
identified as hyperkinetic have experienced gestational stress. 
The most urgent need for progesterone therapy, I think, is in preventing a continuing epidemic of brain damage. Beyond that, many studies have found that the use of natural progesterone 
increases the child's IQ, typically by around 35 points (though 
there are claims of consistent 200 IQ's), and produces personalities that are more "indepen dent, individualistic, self -
assured, self -sufficient, and sensitive" (J.M. Reinish, The Female 
Patient, April, 1978, p. 87). Protection against hypoglycemia is 
probably the main mechanism  — diabetic mothers often have 
precocious children, if they aren't damaged by drugs and irrational diets. Ten to fifteen grams per pregnancy, at increasing dosage, 
stopping a few days before expected delivery, seems to be the 
optimum amount, when there is some sign of excessive estrogen or expected toxemia, such as continuing menstruation in the first 2 or 3 months of pregnancy. The AMA department of drugs has 
specifically excluded progesterone from the sex hormones which 
are "now contraindicated in early pregnancy" (JAMA 239 (3) 
p.236).  
Hypoglycemia (which can result from any respiratory defect) 
can produce malfunction of any tissue, but brain dysfunction and immune dysfunction are very common effects. Adamkiewics has shown that allergic reactions to a given substance will decrease from 100 percent to zero, when the blood glucose increases 
from, for example, 50 mg.% to 150 mg.% or more (also see 
Chernigovsky's book, lnteroceptors). Progesterone (and thyroid) will help in most allergic diseases, including the autoimmune and "collagen diseases," because it helps to maintain blood 
sugar  
19(promoting respiration and improving use of fat, sparing glucose) 
and also because it stabilizes lysosomes. This polar opposition of 
estrogen and progesterone also involves the polar antagonism of 
cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP, and to some extent a related 
antagonism of  various prostaglandins (it has been suggested that 
this involves different populations of lysosomes, but I suspect it 
has to do with the superoxide dismutase enzyme system, and its 
inhibition or activation, since one of my assays to determine the action of estrogen turns out to be an inverse indicator of S.O.D. 
activity). Although progesterone and cortisone both raise blood 
sugar and stabilize lysosomes, their effect on the brain is very different: in large doses, progesterone is sedative and 
anesthetic, while cortisone is stimulating, and cortisone causes 
changes in the brain which resemble aging. The dopamine-serotonin antagonism (e.g., in the control of prolactin secretion) 
can be modified by progesterone, thyroid, and other factors.  
Pfeiffer has investigated the relationship of porphyria to 
certain forms of "schizophrenia," but I don't think he has mentioned that a good dose of glucose, or of an anti -estrogen 
hormone, such as testosterone or progesterone, will make the 
symptoms go away, just about as dr amatically as Adamkiewics' 
glucose infusion will block inflammation or anaphylactic shock 
(incidentally, medical people just recently found that a large infusion of glucose was  effective treatment in septic shock). 
Vitamin E, the old anti -estrogen, pro -fertility, pro -oxygen, anti -
clot nutrient, is now recognized as a factor in the control of porphyrin synthesis. Adaptively, it is logical for a lack of oxygen (as at high altitudes) to stimulate synthesis of the porphyrin ring, 
to use in respiratory systems, as hemoglobin or catalase. Other 
schizophrenias that Pfeiffer investigated involve disturbances  in 
copper, zinc, and histamine, so it is interesting to note that these are powerfully regulated by estrogen, progesterone, and thyroid. 
Oxidation of epinephrine to adrenochrome has been seen in the 
uterus under the influence of estrogen, with copper as catalyst.  
Other investigators have noticed abnormalities of 
pigmentation associated with psychoses or other nerve- related 
disease. Parkinson's disease, for exampl e, involves degeneration 
of melanin- rich nerves, and melanin has now been identified as a 
"progesterone receptor," at least in some lower animals.  
Most of the known biochemistry of lithium happens to overlap 
the actions of progesterone, e.g., aldosterone antagonism. 
However, while lit hium has an anti -thyroid action, progesterone 
supports secretion of thyroxine, and apparently inhibits the formation of reverse T3, that chemical blocks the action of thyroid hormone. I have seen several  
20women  substitute progesterone for lithium, and several of these 
have then gone on to rely on nutrition and light.  
While progesterone might seem to cure almost every thing, 
we should be careful to use it only when the biochemical 
mechanism is fairly evident. A progesterone deficiency can be 
misdiagnosed, as (for example) epilepsy, Bright's disease, 
multiple sclerosis, or even estrogen deficiency (as in menopause). It can affect susceptibility to many conditions 
including herpes infections, dizziness, dysperception, varicose 
veins, mastitis, fibroma, and en dometriosis. Cyclic edema, 
depression, and migraine are, in my experience, always stopped 
by progesterone. Sexual functions are often improved.  
Progesterone is the precur sor (following acetate and 
cholesterol) for all of the other steroid hormones, so it can be used in men. It (or its precursor, pregnenolone) has been used 
for prostatitis, arthritis, and infertility in men. Large amounts, 
though, would probably suppress LH, and lower testosterone synthesis, but a smaller amount (especially in old men) seems to increase sperm count and motility. In male and female athletes who become infertile, it would seem to be the appropriate 
therapy, generally in combination with thyroi d. 
Progesterone has been shown to be effective in many animal 
tumors, including pituitary tumors and other es trogen- induced 
tumors, and in human cervical and breast cancers. Since glucose 
metabolism is disturbed in cancer, it would seem reasonable to comb ine progesterone therapy with sufficient thyroid to maintain 
protein assimilation, and to provide a high protein diet to assure that the liver can excrete estrogen.  
Even very intense emotional or perceptual symptoms 
typically disappear within 40 minutes when a dose of 300 mg. is given transdermally, dissolved in vitamin E or olive oil. Ovarian cysts, menopausal flushing, acne, sprains, and menstrual cramps 
can also be relieved with dramatic speed. In Addison's disease it 
can prevent some of the side effects  of cortisone. Facial hair is 
often normalized in women. I have distributed about 25,000 doses of progesterone, and failure to use enough has been the most 
common problem. I always spend at least an hour with each 
person, learning about them and explaining  relevant aspects of 
physiology and nutrition. I have each person read at least one book on the subject, such as the following:  
K. Dalton, Premenstrual Syndrome and Progesterone 
Therapy (1978)  
B. Barnes,  Hypothyroidism, the Unsuspected Disease  
R. Peat,  Mind and Tissue; Nutrition for Women; and my 
progesterone papers.  
21                   DOSAGE OF PROGESTERONE 
 
Since progesterone is not known to have any side effects 
except for alteration of the menstrual cycle and production of 
euphoria (until doses of several grams per day are reached, at 
which point its anesthetic property begins to appear), the basic procedure should be to use it in sufficient quantity to make the symptoms dis appear, and to time its use so that menstrual 
cycles are no t disrupted. This normally means using it only 
between ovulation and menstruation unless symptoms are suffi -
ciently serious that a missed period is not important. The basic 
idea of giving enough to stop the symptoms can be refined by 
some information on a few of the factors that condition the need for progesterone.  
An excessive estrogen/progesterone ratio is more generally 
involved than either a simple excess of estrogen or a deficiency of progesterone, but even this ratio is conditioned by other factors, including age, diet, other steroids, thyroid, and other 
hormones. The relative estro gen excess seems to act by 
producing tissue hypoxia (as reported in my dissertation, University of Oregon, 1972), and this is the result of changes 
induced by estrogen in alveolar diffusion, peripheral vascular 
changes, and intracellular oxygen wastage.  
Hypoxia in turn produces edema (as can be observed in the 
cornea when it is deprived of oxygen, as by a contact lens) and 
hypoglycemia (e.g., C. Martin: diminished ATP acts  like insulin), 
because glycolysis must increase greatly for even a small deficiency of oxygen. Elevated blood lactic acid is one sign of tissue hypoxia. Edema, hypoglycemia, and lactic acidemia can 
also be produced by other "respiratory" defects, including hypo -
thyroidism, in which the tissue does not use enough oxygen - 
the skin will be bluer (in thin places, such as around the eyes) when hypoxia, rather than low oxygen consumption, is involved. 
Low thyroid is one cause of excess estrogen; when both are involved, the color of the skin is neither red nor blue, but 
relatively bloodless white or yellow.  
Symptoms in cycling women are most common around 
ovulation and in  the premenstrual week, when 
22the estrogen/progesterone ratio is normally highest. The early 
twenties and the late thirties and menopause are the ages when the ratio is most often disturbed - and these are also 
the ages when thyroid disorders are commonest in women.  
 
Besides a family  tendency to have related symptoms, 
the individual who suffers from one aspect of the proges -
terone deficiency will tend to develop others at different times. With cyclic depressions or migraine headaches at age 22, there will possibly be breast disease an d often there will 
be problems with pregnancy, and menopause may bring on a 
complete collapse.  
Excess stress (by elevating estrogen and/or deplet ing 
progesterone, etc.) may bring on symptoms in someone who never had them. Spending a summer in Alaska, with an 
unusually long day, may relieve the symptoms of a chronic sufferer. Dark cloudy winters in England or the Pacific Northwest are powerful stressors, and cause lower progesterone in women and testosterone in men. Toxins, such as copper and lead, can pro duce similar symptoms. 
Porphyria and zinc deficiency are often caused by the hormone imbalance. A very common cause of an estrogen excess is a dietary protein deficiency - the liver simply cannot 
detoxify estrogen when it is under nourished (see Lipschutz 
references). 
23 
With a diet high in protein (e.g., 70- 100 grams per day, including 
eggs) and vitamin A (liver once a week), I have found that the dose 
can be reduced each  month. Using thyroid will usually reduce the 
amount of progesterone needed. Storage of progesterone apparently occurs in adipose tissue, so that one dose which is much bigger than needed will sometimes control the symptoms for several days.  
Katharina Dalton, Premenstrual Syndrome and Pro-
gesterone Therapy, Year Book Medical Publishers, Inc., Chicago, 
1977.  
Alexander Lipschutz, Steroid Hormones and Tumors, Williams 
and Wilkens Company, Baltimore, 1950.  
Raymond F. Peat, Age Related Oxidative Changes In the 
Hamster Uterus, University of Oregon thesis, Eugene, Oregon, 1972.  
24TRANSDERMAL PROGESTERONE  
FOR  PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME  
For many years, Katharina Dalton' has studied the use of 
progesterone therapy for the premenstrual syn drome. A 
typical patient may require ten or more progesterone 
injections per month, more or less permanently. While this is 
feasible (at least in some countries) it is not comfortable or 
convenient, in some cases leads to serious reactions at the injection sites, and in the United States would be too expensive for general use. When the syndrome is disabling, even the burden of frequent and expensive injections is usually seen as a welcome alternative. However, a less 
expensive and more pleasant form of administration could 
make the therapy available to millions of women who are now disabled for one or more days each month. We are reporting here on what we believe to be a satisfactory alternative to the injection or implantation of progesterone, namely, a solution of progesterone and vegetable oil in a lotion or "cold cream" 
base for transdermal use. 
After animal experiments revealed that progesterone in 
vegetable oil was absorbed effectively through the skin, in 
1977 we began experiments with women who suffered from the premenstrual syndrome.  
The effectiveness of the transdermal (absorption) route 
of administration varies with the individual, but compares favorably with injections in the amount assimilated. Thickness of skin or degree of circulation in the skin (these can be very abnormal in hypothyroidism, for example) and the amount of adipose tissue apparently make some difference in the rate of 
absorption and response. When a small daily dose (e.g., 5 or 
10 mg.) is sufficient, this can be taken as about 250 mg. of a three percent cream rubbed into the throat, where it leaves no noticeable oiliness after a few minutes. For large doses, the appropriate amount can be applied to a larger area of skin after a hot bath, once or twice a day if necessary. 
We have used transdermal progesterone therapy in two 
hundred women suffering from the full range of perimenstrual symptoms, including migraine, acne, de pression, mastalgia, 
edema, and lethargy, and we found that nearly all of the 
women, applying the lotion them selves, are able to find the 
appropriate dosage for controlling their symptoms. 
Occasionally, thyroid therapy, weight reduction, or change in some aspect of life- style is  
25necessary  for complete relief from symptoms. We have learned 
that it is necessary to be very explicit in describ ing the amounts 
that can be used, while leaving it up to the patient to find the 
dose which controls her symptoms, because some women have 
an exaggerated idea of the power of a "hormone". We have learned, when some women said the progesterone had no effect, that they were applying it as sparingly as they would a rare per fume, just touching it to their wrists.
 
Another problem we have encountered is that a few women 
have trouble understanding how, if their edema is caused by "hormones", a "hormone" could relieve the edema. We have 
usually solved such problems by applying one dose (sometimes using a twenty -five percent solution) in the office, and waiting 
thirty or forty minutes to make sure that it was large enough to 
take effect. Once having felt sudden relief from this "cold cream", it is easier for the patient to understand how it should be 
used.  
Unfortunately, many of the solvents which hold pro gesterone 
stably in a concentrated solution are highly allergenic. Injectable 
progesterone in oil could be used transdermally except for this 
problem. Progesterone can be removed from an injectable water 
suspension, and dissolved in warm olive or almond oil for transdermal use in patients who react to other solvents.  
1Katharina Dalton, The Premenstrual Syndrome and Pro - 
gesterone Therapy, Year Book Medical Publishers, Inc., Chicago, 
1977.  
26 TOPICAL PROGESTERONE FOR ACNE  
In a previous study which found topical progesterone 
ineffective as therapy for acne, the investigators used 
ethanol as a solvent1. When water is added to a solution of 
progesterone and ethanol, the progesterone crystalizes out 
of solution, because water and ethanol have a fairly high 
mutual solubility and progesterone is practically in soluble in 
a water -ethanol mixture. When the progester one- alcohol 
solution is applied to the skin, the alcohol takes up moisture  
from the skin, which is sufficient to cause the progesterone 
to be left undissolved on the sur face. We have tried other 
solvents, including olive oil and vitamin E , which are stable 
in the presence of moisture, and we have had consistently 
positive resul ts in twelve cases of acne associated with the 
menstrual cycle (usual ly appearing or getting worse around 
ovulation or just before menstruation) and in one of two 
teenage boys with chronic acne.  
Because of the poor solubility, or instability of solu tion, 
of progesterone in natural oils of variable composi tion, we 
advised the patients to warm the solution in a hot water bath 
before every application. The solutions varied from one to 
ten percent progesterone (i.e., one to ten grams per 100 ml. 
of oil). Pat ients applied the oil to the af fected skin once or 
twice a day. The amount of pro gesterone applied ranged 
from about 25 mg. per day to about 250 mg. per day.  
The patients (except for one of the teenage boys, who 
reported no effect), consistently reported  that use of 
progesterone at the first sign of a pimple stopped the 
development at that stage, prevented the expected out -
break, and within a few days resulted in a relatively clear 
skin. The improvement ranges from complete freedom from 
pimples in half of  the group, to "improved, but still visible 
blemishes" in three women. Some of the solvents 
(sandlewood oil, vitamin E ) caused an "allergic" skin ir -
ritation in two women, but switching to olive oil eliminated 
those reactions.  
 
 
 
1British Journal of Dermatology, Volume 99, Supplement 16, 
9, July, 1978.  
27PROGESTERONE AND BODY TEMPERATURE  
Women, more often than men, have "normal" body 
temperatures which are distinctly below normal, i.e., as low 
as 97 degrees, especially in the two weeks following men-
struation. In men, giving progesterone doesn’t cause an 
increase in body temperature, though it usually does in 
women. Progesterone is at its lowest in the two weeks 
between menstruating and ovulating. The fact that proges -
terone isn't "therm ogenic" in men suggests that its activity 
relates to estrogen, which is its "antagonist." It is known that 
thyroid hormone increases heat production, and that es -
trogen is in many ways antagonistic to thyroxin. Therefore, it 
is not surprising that progeste rone, by blocking estrogen's 
blockage of the thyroid hormone, should promote the effect 
of thyroxin and raise the temperature. The metabolism is 
shifted toward oxidation of fat, with the result that sugar is 
spared for the brain and kidneys and, in pregnan cy, for the 
fetus.  
Nutrition which supports the adrenals, ovaries, thyroid 
and liver can raise the body temperature toward normal, while 
reducing premenstrual symptoms and dysmenorrhea. 
Usually, vitamins A, E, pantothenic acid, and C will raise the 
tempera ture; sometimes other B complex vitamins are 
needed, as well as minerals such as iodine, manganese, 
zinc, and magnesium.  
During stress, the temperature is often above normal, 
even when there are symptoms of progesterone deficiency. I 
have noticed that this  is usually associated with enlarged 
lymph glands, as if the adrenal cortex had become inactive. 
In this state, adrenalin (and ACTH) would continue to be 
secreted, possibly at high levels, since the cortex normally 
makes anti -stress hormones to take over some of the resis -
tance -promoting effects of adrenaline, if the stress lasts 
more than an hour or so. Adrenaline shrinks blood vessels 
in the skin (preventing heat loss) while stimulating 
metabolism and so might account for this fever of stress.  
Sometimes p rogesterone seems to be chronically 
deficient (leading to slight — though possibly prolonged -
menstruation, or even amenorrhea), in women who exercise 
hard. Since progesterone can be converted into cortisone to 
handle stress, this could explain why well tr ained athletes 
(who need lots of cortisone) so often miss periods. It seems 
to be a simple over -consumption of progesterone, which is 
probably a reasonable biological adaptation, preventing 
pregnancy during times of stress.  
28BREAST SORENESS, CYSTIC OVARIES  
Women with benign breast diseases are likely to have 
abnormally low progesterone levels, while their estrogen 
stays relatively high (Mauvais -Jarvis, Annal es d'Endocrin -
ologie 37, 309 -310, 1976). This same imbalance may also 
play a role in breast cancer (Sherman and Korenman, 
Cancer 33, 1506, 1974). Since progesterone is a chemical 
precursor of cortisol, prolonged stress would tend to lower 
the availability of progesterone, unle ss the adrenal glands 
are very well nourished. Vitamin A is required for progester -
one synthesis, as well as for proper maturation of cells in 
membranes and glandular tissue. Pantothenic acid, niacin 
and vitamin C are commonly limiting factors in synthesis  of 
adrenal hormones. (Synthetic "progestins" are likely to 
cause, rather than to prevent,  breast cancer, and should 
never be used; natural progesterone needn't be injected, as 
some doctors believe, since it can be absorbed through the 
skin.) Cystic ovarie s are often associated with sore breasts. 
Animal experiments (Janes; Leatham) show that lack of 
thyroid hormone can cause cystic ovaries. (See article on 
estrogen -thyroxin antagonism.)  
II. STRESS  
BLOOD SUGAR:  
SOME TECHNICAL BACKGROUND  
Sugar can be used to produce energy with or without 
oxygen, but oxidative metabolism is about 15 times more 
efficient than the non -oxidative "glycolytic" or fermentive 
metabolism; higher organisms depend on this high 
efficiency oxidation for maintaining integration and normal 
functioning : If there is a small interference with respiration, 
the organism can adapt by increasing the rate of glycolysis, 
but there must be enough sugar to meet the demand. A 
response to stimulation is the production of more energy, 
with a proportional  increase of oxygen and sugar 
consumption by the stimulated tissue; this produces more 
carbon dioxide, which enlarges the blood vessels in the 
area, providing more sugar and oxygen. If the irritation 
becomes destructive, efficiency is lost: oxygen is eithe r 
consumed wastefully, causing blueness of the tissue 
(assuming circulation continues; blueness can aiso indicate 
bad circulation), or is not con sumed, causing redness of the 
tissue. As more sugar is consumed in compensation, lactic 
acid also enlarges the  blood vessels.  
If the inflamed or exhausted tissue is small, the lactic  
29acid can be consumed by other oxidizing tissues, sufficient 
sugar usually can be supplied, and repair occurs. But a large  
inflammation, or profound exhaustion, will lower the blood 
sugar systemically, and will deliver large amounts of lactic acid 
to the liver. The liver synthesizes glucose from the lactic acid, 
but at the expense of about 6 times more energy than is 
obtained from the inefficient metabolism — so that 
organismically, that tissue becomes 90 times less efficient than 
its original state. Besides this, an idle destruction of energy 
molecules (ATP or creatine phosphate) will increase the 
wastefulness even more.  
When the organism detects the inflammation or other 
stress (possibly by sensing changes in blood sugar, lactic 
acid, or carbon dioxide, or all of them) its adrenal glands will 
secrete anti -stress hormones, including adrenalin and corti -
sone (assuming these glan ds are not exhausted or starved). 
Both adrenalin and cortisone can raise blood sugar to meet 
the increased need. Cortisone stimulates the conversion of 
protein to sugar, and since there are no "stored proteins" 
(other than small amounts circulating in the blood) this 
means that cortisone starts the conversion of the organism 
into fuel for the problem area. In acute emergencies, the 
lymphoid tissues will shrink first, which is all right, since they 
can be restored after the animal recovers, and their functio n 
— immunity — is partly a matter of a longer time scale, days 
to weeks. But if these tissues are chronically depleted by 
stress or malnutrition, infection is more likely to be fatal, as 
in old age or in poor populations. (The connection between 
infec tion, stress and sugar was illustrated recently by the 
discovery that infusing large amounts of glucose can relieve 
septic shock.)  
Carbonated water can provide enough carbon dioxide 
(sometimes) to improve the delivery of blood (and glucose) 
to the brain. Low t hyroid leads to low production of carbon 
dioxide and to wastage of glucose.  
Various nutritional, hormonal, or toxic states interfere 
with respiration in different ways: for example, vitamin E 
deficiency, estrogen excess, toxic thyroid, and DNP (the 
formerly popular cancer -causing reducing drug) cause 
oxygen to be consumed without producing the normal 
amount of useful energy. Vitamin B2 or copper deficiency 
can prevent consumption of oxygen. Cancer (contrary to a 
tenacious establishment doctrine) involves a respiratory 
defect, and causes a tendency toward hypoglycemia which 
is often  compensated by the conversion of protein to sugar, 
leading to the terminal wasting state (cachexia). (See 
Shapot and Blinov, Cancer Research 34, 1827- 32, 1974.)  
Vasodilation, edema, local heat and acidity are early 
responses to an irritant or energy defect; later, increased  
30collagen production and capillary proliferation occur. 
Tumefaction and tissue death can result if the organism's 
resources aren't adequate.  
Sugar wastage, leading to lactic acid production, can 
result from a vitamin B 2 deficiency, and lactic acid 
appears to stimulate vascularization (Imre, 1964; Exp. 
Eye Res. 25, Supplement, 1977, P. 284). This would 
relate to the development of blood supply to cancers, and 
also to the blood -shot eyes and red noses and cheeks of 
alcoho lics and others who are deficient in vitamin B2.  
In general, stress should be met first by correcting the 
defect, which may be environmental or nutritional. 
Increased nutritional needs usually include protein and 
fat; acute hypoglycemia may require a large  amount of 
sugar, and this suggests that the adrenals may be 
depleted, in which case pantothenic acid, vitamin C, 
vitamin A, magnesium and potassium should be provided 
in addition to other nutrients.  
Sometimes, sugar has to be eliminated permanently 
to con trol hypoglycemia. Some people have to eat a 
snack (e.g., a small slice of cheese) every hour, but this 
can often be overcome if the liver is able to recuperate.  
Pantothenic acid is needed by the liver to destroy 
insulin  (insulinase), so hyperinsulinism , causing  hypo-
glycemia,  can sometimes be remedied with this nutrient. 
STRESS AND SPECIAL NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
According to Hans Selye, activation or injury of tissue 
is the beginning of stress. The more cells involved, the 
greater is the stress. An inj ury to a leg connected only by 
blood vessels produces a stress reaction in the animal, 
so the signal of stress can be transmitted in the blood, 
though the nerves are normally also involved. Adenine 
nucleotides have been suspected as a cause of shock 
(becau se they are vasodilators, as are many other 
products of stress, including phosphate), but other 
possibilities are histamine, various polyamines, and low 
blood sugar.  
Selye divides stress into three phases: alarm,  
resistance (or adaptation), and exhaustion. Three tissues 
are usually the first to show effects: thymolymphatic 
tissue shrinks, gastrointestinal tissue becomes inflamed 
and bleeds, and the adrenal cortex becomes enlarged.  
Selye classifies steroids into anti- and pro-
inflammatory. Inflammation is a relatively non -specific, and 
hopefully local, reaction, serving to isolate the problem if it 
is a toxin or infection. Cortisol is a typical anti -
inflammatory hormone; DOC (deoxycorticosterone) is 
considered by Sel ye to be a natural pro -inflammatory 
steroid, but other endocrinologists point out that it is 
normally present only in very small  
31amounts, as a precursor of aldosterone (which helps retain 
sodium in stress  — sodium probably helps activate the 
glycolytic pathway, speeding the use of sugar). Some of 
Selye's stress experiments involved giving a large dose of 
sodium, presumably increasing the amount of DOC in the 
tissues, and intensifying stress symptoms.  
Injur y and exertion have in common the need for more 
fuel. I think the blood sugar level is therefore useful at least 
for understanding stress, even if other substances are 
involved in the " signaling " or coordinating process. From my 
own experience, I am inclin ed to believe that blood sugar is 
an important integrating factor, and that the organism can 
probably sense small or rapid fluctuations that would be very 
hard to detect by the usual laboratory procedures. For 
example, males in particular are known to secr ete adrenaline 
under the stress of having blood drawn, and this tends to 
raise the concentration of blood sugar. Even when extremely 
large and prolonged variations in blood sugar are found, the 
concept of "normal range" allows most physicians to dis miss 
them as being insignificant — even when the patient 
develops classical symptoms of hypoglycemia: if the patient 
faints or has convulsions when his blood sugar falls 50 
mg.%, the physician is likely to note the "psychosomatic 
reaction" or the "coincidental e pilepsy," since a "normal 
variation" in blood sugar concentration supposedly couldn't 
be respon sible. More physicians are now recognizing that 
the rate of fall can be as important as the absolute level.  
Hans Selye sometimes used an injected metal, such as  
iron salts, to experimentally sensitize animals to stress, 
making it easier to produce arthritis. He found that vitamin E 
could offset this effect of iron.  
SUGAR AND THE PANCREAS  
Ordinary refined cane or beet sugar is sucrose, a "double 
sugar" or disaccha ride. (Some of this chemical terminology is 
useful for understanding food labels .) The two units making 
up sucrose are glucose and fructose. These are 
monosaccharides , and since they contain six carbon atoms, 
they can also be called hexoses. Glucose is classed as an  
“aldose" because it contains an aldehyde group: by just 
shifting the position of two hydrogen atoms onto this al -
dehyde group, glucose turns into fructose (a keto sugar or 
ketose").  
Carbohydrates are usually split into monosaccha rides 
before being absorbed. They are carried to the liver, where 
glucose can be used to replenish the storage form  of 
carbohydrate, glycogen. If there is more glucose than the liver 
can store, it reaches the pancreas where it stimulates
32the release of ins ulin, which disposes of the sugar by 
stimulating synthesis of fat and glycogen. The insulin is only 
slowly degraded, so it will go on lowering blood sugar if sugar 
isn't being absorbed continuously from the gut. If blood sugar 
gets too low, an alarm reacti on will produce adrenalin to 
restore blood sugar, with the result that the person may feel 
anxious.                                                           
        Insulin should be about 30% destroyed by the liver each 
time the blood circulates to the li ver, but a pantothenic acid 
deficiency will prevent this regulation. Low thyroid also 
interferes with liver function limiting the storage and release 
of glycogen.  
Fructose doesn't stimulate the pancreas as glucose 
does. It is gradually converted into glucose. In people with 
high blood lipids, however, it is utilized by liver and fat 
tissues several times faster than it is in normal people: it is 
as if the cellular "doors" we re already open in these people,  
maybe as a result of high insulin levels, and the cells accept 
fructose more rapidly than normal. This doesn't imply that 
fructose is to be avoided as rigidly as is glucose, since I 
don't think there is any evidence that it initiates any 
problem. Grapes are rich in glucose; other fruits have 
varying q uantities of fructose: honey contains some 
fructose. Jerusalem artichokes that have been kept in 
storage are a very good source of fructose. Onions are 
another source. I suspect that even glucose wouldn't be so 
hard on the body if it were always taken with  potassium and 
other nutrients involved in its metabolism.  
Potassium is necessary for utilization of sugar , and 
should probably always be tried as a supplement in the 
diabetic diet, especially since fruits, an important source 
of potassium, may be avoided because of their sugar. 
Some B vitamins (B1 and B2 and probably niacin) are 
said to have similar effects on the utilization of sugar. 
Some forms of diabetes involve normal or high levels of 
insulin, others, a lack of insulin; both have been found to 
respon d to nutrition , but especially the high insulin form. 
The pancreas can be damaged by prolonged malnutrition, 
so that the inability to produce insulin may be permanent. 
Magnesium and vitamin B6 deficiencies are known to be 
involved in damage to the pancreas . Insulin itself is only 
part of the " insulin- like" system (Adv in Metabol Disorders 
7, p.26, 1974); proper treatment requires a proper study 
of all factors. I know of children who have been put 
immediately on insulin  for life, after one urine test 
showed glucose, even though the test followed a 
stressful infection. Stress can cause sugar to appear in 
the urine, as can many other conditions, and this does 
not call for insulin treatment.  
33EMOTIONAL PROBLEMS  
Just before menstruation begins, and just after giving 
birth, the level of estrogen in the body can be high, and out of 
proportion to other hormones. Tension, anxiety, depression, 
being too easily upset emotionally, and even having hal -
lucinations can result from this hormone imbalance. E xcess 
estrogen causes the body to accumulate copper, and copper 
poisoning itself (often caused by water that is contaminated, 
for example by plumbing, a hot water heater, or utensils) is 
known to cause symptoms of schizophrenia. Menopause is 
another time o f frequent emotional upsets, for many women. A 
type of psychosis sometimes occurs at menopause. Since it is 
easier to test for excess copper than for excess estrogen, it 
might be worthwhile to have this test done when there are 
emotional problems during menopause, around menstrua tion, 
or in the first few weeks after giving birth. Tension resulting 
from too much copper or estrogen can be relieved 
nutritionally. Usually a zinc supplement is necessary — about 
20 mg. a day; about 30 mg. of vitamin B6 has been recom -
mended for this problem, but the amount varies with the 
individual. The other B vitamins, and vitamins E and A should 
also be used. Sometimes as much as 500 mg. of niacin can 
be required to stop a "hysterical" feeling. The mildly sedative 
action of m agnesium can also have a dramatic effect. One 
half to one gram of magnesium is enough if it is taken in a 
highly soluble (and assimilable) form such as magnesium 
chloride. Since low blood sugar is often a factor in anxiety or 
depression, adequate protein a nd calories must be eaten 
regularly. Biotin (1- 2 mg.) can stop some depressions. Fruit is 
very useful in maintaining blood sugar since it provides sugar 
with potassium which helps to avoid an insulin reaction. 
PEOPLE DIAGNOSED AS "PSYCHOTIC"  
Women are increasingly being diagnosed as "manic -
depressive," though this used to be thought of as mainly a 
man's disease. I think the new popularity of lithium "therapy" 
has contributed to this diagnostic trend. Even if the problem 
is what had previously been described  as "premenstrual 
depression," lithium therapy does work, though some pa -
tients complain of tremor, dullness, and clumsiness.  
Several of the known biochemical effects of lithium are 
similar to those of progesterone, including antagonism to 
aldosterone, mod ification of serotonin metabolism, elevation 
of nerve thresholds, and facilitated disposition of ammonia.  
34(Other psycho- active chemicals which have some 
overlap with progesterone are DOPA, bromocryptine, and 
physo stigmine.)  
One type of "schi zophrenia," and the very common 
symptom of " agoraphobia " or reclusiveness, are associated 
with high levels of porphyrins and pyrroles. Fasting, liver 
damage, and increased estrogen levels can raise the con -
centrations of certain of these substances; they s eem to 
promote urinary loss of zinc and vitamin B6. Estrogen 
promotes copper (and iron, and calcium) retention, and 
copper tends to displace zinc. The high levels of copper, 
iron and lead which are found in many people with mental 
problems may be secondary  to a hormone disturbance. 
Thyroid gland or progesterone, or both, can produce a 
complete disappearance of mental symptoms when those 
symptoms result from any biochemical imbalance that can 
be rectified hormonally, because these two substances have 
very ge neralized regulatory functions. I feel that any "diag -
nosis" (naming in Latin) of a "functional mental distur bance" 
is at best irrelevant, and may be very destructive. People 
with diagnoses of "schizophrenia," "epilepsy," "manic -
depressive psychosis," "Pa rkinsonism," "myasth enia gravis," 
"involutional psychosis," "neuritis," "sclero sis," etc., have 
reported that they felt normal or improved after taking 
progesterone, often within 40 minutes. Magne sium, as 
epsom salts or magnesium chloride or carbonate, can 
relieve some cases or irritability and tension, even when 
something else, such as hypothyroidism, is the basic cause.  
Many symptoms have been blamed on cerebral edema, 
which might result from too much estrogen. However, the  
speed  with which some symptoms disappear suggest other 
possible explanations. Just as veins in the forehead shrink 
immediately if a large amount of sugar is taken for a migraine, 
I have seen veins (back of hand) disappear with progester one 
treatment, just when  a suicidal depression is lifting. This 
suggests that there may be a "migraine" condition in the blood 
vessels of the limbic system of the brain, but there are also 
very rapid shifts in brain chemistry.  
Light and smell are known to affect hormone production. 
A musky material (Le Magnen's "exaltolide," probably 
includes androstenol) is probably a social regulator of 
hormones — perfume containing musk might affect the 
woman who wears it. Bright lights for  18 hours per day can 
correct some hormone -mood problems.  
Canker sores, herpes infections, and bleeding gums, if 
associated with mental symptoms, suggest a thyroid and/or 
progesterone deficiency.  
35CANCER PRODUCES STRESS  
Cancer overstimulates  the anti -stress adrenocortical 
hormones, and usually produces extreme wasting from 
mobilization of fat and protein; blood sugar and glycogen 
storage are disturbed. During or after cancer treatment the 
"hypoglycemia" diet seems desirable: frequent small feed-
ings, liver (or similar nutrients), magnesium, potassium. 
Vitamins A, E, C, and pantothenic acid are particularly 
important in stress, but all nutrients are necessary.  
In an article on inflammation, the Encyclopedia Britan -
nica makes this comment which is extremely interesting in 
connection with the fact that cancer involves a failure of the 
immune reaction:  
Severe starvation or...deficiency of protein may 
restrict antibody formation. Hormones of the 
adrenal cortex in sufficient amounts depress formation  of certain types of antibody. The adren -
al cortex secretions are capable of altering the inflammatory reaction in several ways: excessive amounts of the hydrocortisone type of secretion 
reduce the quantity of exudate formed and the 
amount of fibrous tissue and capillary prolifera -
tion.  
About 1950, prisoners were experimentally injected with 
cancer cells; those who already had cancer developed 
tumors where cells were injected; healthy patients appar ently 
never developed cancer, though a reasonable follow- up 
wasn't done. Cortisone treatment is known to speed growth 
and spreading of injected cancer cells. Cancer patients are 
typically unable to even produce a normal inflammation, as if 
they are powerfully dosed with the anti -stress cortisone- type 
hormones. The failure of the immune system, which can 
normally wipe out cancer cells as they develop, seems to be 
an essential feature of cancer, and as quoted above, 
adrenocortical hormones can suppress antibody formation; 
the conversion of body protein to sugar (an effect of these 
hormones) causes shrinking of the thymus gland, which is 
essential for healthy immune reactions. Although there may 
be other things involved in the immune suppression, part of it 
appears to be this drain on the body's protein, which can be 
alleviated nutritionally. Dr. W. D. Kelly (One answer to 
cancer) describes an interesting test for cancer based on this 
problem in protein metabolism. A drop of blood squeezed 
from a puncture in the finger should stand up in a spherical 
drop, but when a person is developing cancer it spreads 
instead of rounding up. (See the section on edema)
36 
Stress apparently increases a person's need for all 
nutrients including calories and protein. The vitamins most 
commonly used for resisting stress are A, C, E, and panto -
thenic acid. The minerals magnesium, calcium, potassium 
and zinc can help in the first stages of stress, and sodium 
supplements may be needed in the last extreme stage of 
stress when the adrenals have been exhausted.  
ARTHRITIS AND STRESS  
Dr. E. C. Barton -Wright and Dr. W. A. Elliot have found 
pantothenic acid (at least 25 to 50 milligrams per day) useful 
in arthritis. Arthritis is commonly a result of stress, stress 
increases the need for that vitamin and also for other 
nutrients including  vitamins A and C. Arthritis often follows 
surgery. Sometimes surgery can bring on chronic allergic 
problems (hay fever, gas, fatigue, etc.) but it can also 
apparently weaken the immune system so badly that old 
allergies disappear after an operation.  
Stres s inhibits the thyroid, and can lower progesterone 
(and/or testosterone) while raising estrogen. Recent work 
by Siiteri and his group shows a hormonal involvement in 
various "autoimmune" diseases. Females are much more 
susceptible to these sicknesses than are males. Systemic 
lupus erythematosis and rheumatoid arthritis are common.  
Vitamin A offsets a protein deficiency, and a protein 
deficiency can damage immunity.  
Any activity, if planned and completed according to plan 
without interruption, can reduce str ess. Enforced inactivity, 
and inability to achieve what was intended, are powerful 
stressors. The adrenal hormones and mineral metabolism 
are disturbed in stress, whether the cause is a disorganized 
style of life, or the injury of surgery. The diet should include 
about 90 grams of protein (in frequent feedings), eggs as a 
source of sulfur (needed to synthesize joint lubricants, for 
example), and should keep the ratio of magnesium to 
calcium high (as with vegetables, bran, fruit), and the 
phosphate intake lo w (this would include using green leaves 
in place of some meat, as well as using cheese). Vitamins 
C, E, and pantothenic acid are needed in especially large 
amount in stress. Vitamins A and B2 are also essential for 
production of the anti -stress hormones. Inositol is known to 
protect biological materials from many kinds of damage, and 
might have this effect in arthritis, but I don't know of any 
research in this particular application.  
Iron salts, and other heavy metals, have been shown by  
37Hans Selye to produce arthritis, possibly by their ability to 
destroy vitamins E and C.  
Copper is a "specific" oxidant for vitamin C. It is 
associated with many inflammatory diseases, and should 
probably be better investigated in "degenerative" diseases, 
including arthritis and glaucoma.  
Pantothenic acid in very large doses was recently 
found to protect against stress even when an animal's 
adrenals were removed. Since the nutrient is needed to 
destroy insulin, I think part of its anti -stress effect comes 
from minimizing hypoglycemia, and so reducing the amount 
of cortisone needed.  
On the cellular level, stress lowers the energy charge. 
Systemically, stress inhibits oxidative metabolism. Both of 
these observations indicate that the "basic" anti -stress 
hormone  would be thyroid. Hypothyroidism often involves 
arthritis — sometimes the tiny bones of the ear which 
transmit sound are affected. Ringing of the ears and 
deafness for high sounds are common in hypothyroidism  
M. Kirchgassner and H.L. Mueller, The effect o f varying the 
protein diet on the trace elements content of early -weaned 
piglets." Landwirtsch Forsch 27 (314), p. 358 -364, 1974: 
"copper/dry body matter clearly fell when the protein supply 
was increased." (And zinc rose.)  
CORTISONE  
About 25 years ago cortisone was found to increase the 
metast atic spread of cancer. Since it raises blood sugar by 
dissolving protein from the tissues, the immune system and 
muscles are damaged. When the muscle mass is diminished, 
loss of fat becomes more difficult. Vitamin A can apparently 
help offset immunosuppression by cortisone. Use of corti -
sone can result in puffiness and water retention. It is a way 
of exaggerating the body's normal hormone response to 
stress, and may be justified if the adrenal glands are 
damaged. Pa ntothenic acid and vitamins C and A can help 
restore the glands' natural activity.   
Vitamin B2 deficiency is also known to affect the 
adrenal glands, and has been suspected of contributing to 
the development of Addison's disease.  
Vitamin A offsets a protei n deficiency, and a protein 
deficiency can damage immunity.  
Cortisone causes the liver to produce estrogen.  
38III. AGING  
AGING  
Some people who are supposed to be "experts" quite 
crazily claim that what you eat has nothing to do with how 
fast you age. Experiments with animals, observations of 
other cultures, and even some experiments with humans 
have shown clearly that nutrition ca n have a profound 
effect on the body changes which are called aging. In the 
three regions where a very high proportion of the 
population lives to be more that 100, the average daily 
calorie intake is only about 1500, which is considered 
"inadequate" by mos t nutritionists. Animals which are kept 
on a low calorie diet live much longer than those that are 
fed more, so we can assume that the low calorie diet 
contributes to the long life of those three groups. However, 
other similarities have been found in the d iets in those 
three regions. Their food is fresh, they use a lot of animal 
fat (e.g., milk and cheese), they regularly eat greens, and 
some of them tend to drink quite a bit of alcohol, though in 
unrefined forms such as wine.  
All of the essential nutrients  are needed constantly to 
prevent deterioration of the body. At different times, 
nutrients such as vitamin C, pantothenic acid, or vitamin E, 
have been identified as methods to prevent premature 
aging. In our culture, many people do have severe 
deficiencie s of those nutrients, but any dietary deficiency 
can cause degenerative changes. I have experimentally 
reversed a variety of degen erative changes with special 
nutrition, but the problem always exists within a particular 
person's physiology, and can't nece ssarily be solved by a 
standardized diet. You have to learn to know what your 
body needs at a particular time. This will be made easier if 
your basic diet is roughly like that described above — 
moderately low calorie intake, fairly high protein intake, 
with high quality proteins such as eggs, milk, and leaves, 
and with fresh fruit or vegetables every day.  
Study of many different species, including humans, 
shows that aging is slower in individuals that have a 
larger brain in relation to body size. Brain size  is strongly 
influenced both by prenatal nutrition and by nutrition in 
early childhood. The first year and a half is extremely 
important for the development of intelligence, since brain 
cells are still becoming more numerous up to that age, but 
growth and development of the brain can still be stunted 
by poor nutrition later. Progesterone is an important factor 
in brain development: estrogen inhibits brain 
development. Unsatur ated fats also inhibit brain 
development if used in excess, and recent studies sho w 
that they also increase visible aging of the skin.  
39MENOPAUSAL FLUSHING  
I have talked to several women in their 20s who com -
plained of sensations of heat around their heads, night 
sweats, sudden flushing, and other symptoms that are 
associated with the menopause. Katharina Dalton has 
found that premenstrual symptoms, which result from a 
relative estrogen surplus and a progester one deficiency, 
often continue during the menopause. Siiteri and his group 
have discovered that one of the steroids 
(androstenedione, usually associated with the male 
hormones) is converted to a form of estrogen at an 
increasing rate as a person gets older , at all ages they 
studied, from 20 to 80, in both men and women. Strickler 
found that only 10% of his patients with menopausal 
symptoms such as flushing, could feel and benefit from 
estrogen when it was alternated with a placebo. These 
studies, and a few dozen others, have convinced me that 
the symptoms of menopause result mainly from a 
progesterone deficiency, relative to the estrogens. The 
10% who really feel better from estrogen possibly have an 
estrogen deficiency, but this has not been determined, 
and several other things could account for the "lift" they 
feel for example, a healthy thyroid gland will respond to 
elevated estrogen with an increased output of thyroxin, 
which at least would make the person feel different, and 
might raise blood sugar, in crease alertness, etc. 
In 1979 menopausal flushing was found to be 
associated with an elevation of the pituitary hormone, LH. 
A lack of progesterone is known to cause a rise in LH.  
Digitalis and progesterone have very similar effects on 
the heart (Szent -Gyorgyi, Muscle Contraction). Digitalis is 
able to raise blood pressure and increase urine production, 
apparently by increasing the tone of the arterioles (Abram, 
1910). If progesterone's effect on muscle includes such an 
effect on arterioles, then the "puzzle" of menopausal — and 
premenopausal — flushing is no puzzle, but is merely one 
symptom of a progesterone deficiency relative to estrogen. 
Progesterone does have a diuretic effect, but this has been 
attributed to an antagonism to aldosterone, rather than to 
an effect on arterioles.  
Besides the nutrients needed to regulate the estrogen 
level (protein and B vitamins) and nutrients needed by the 
thyroid (e.g., iodine, manganese, and cobalt), special atten -
tion should be given to the anti -stress vitamins which are 
involved in progesterone synthesis (vitamin A, pantothenic 
acid, vitamin C, vitamin E) and to the nutrients that are 
known to be "wasted" by excess estrogen: folic acid, zinc, 
and vitamin B6, particularly. Vitamin B6 is needed to 
synthesize mater ials that regulate blood vessel tone and 
that act as  
40brain modulators, governing sleep, emotions, alertness, etc. 
Memory of dreams is said to be promoted by adequate B6 
(Pfeiffer, 1975). White marks on the fingernails, especially of 
the ri ght hand, are suggestive of a zinc deficiency. Brittle 
fingernails are likely to result from too much estrogen. or 
inhibited thyroid function; vitamin A and eggs are useful, but 
calcium and gelatin are not. Magnesium carbonate is very 
useful for stabilizin g nerves and muscles while raising the 
energy level: one gram a day of magnesium is a reasonable 
amount, but many tablets now contain only 15 to 50 mgs.  
Dalton, K., The Premenstrual Syndrome, C. Thomas.  
Springfield, Ill., & London, 1964. 
Hemsell, et al., Plasma precursors of estrogen. II. 
Correlation of the extent and conversion of plas ma 
androstenedione to estrone with age, J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 38, p. 476, 1974.  
Grodin, et al., Source of estrogen production in post -
menopausal women, J. Clin. Endocrinol Metab 36. p. 
207, 1973. 
Strickler, Contemporary Ob /Gyn, August, 1976. Mulley 
and Mitchell, Lancet, June 26, 1976, p. 1397, "Is  
estrogen therapy justified in menopausal  
flushing?"  
C.C. Pfeiffer, Mental and Elemental Nutrients, Keats Publ. 
Co., 1975.  
SIMILARITY OF MENOPAUSE AND CUSHING'S SYN - 
DROME  
Excess estrogen is known to cause hypertrophy of the 
adrenal cortex. Since estrogen stimulates insulin release 
and lowers blood sugar, the hypertrophy may be to 
compensate by raising blood sugar.  
The distribution of fat is similar in aging and in Cushing's 
syndrome. Vitamin E is known to shift enzyme activities in a 
way that would offset this distribution, and this might occur in 
cases caused by hormone disturbances other than mere 
aging.  
The fall of s permine which occurs in senility, in estrogen 
excess, and in hypoglycemia should also be investigated in 
Cushing's syndrome.  
The changes in endometrium, and the "castrate" type of 
vaginal epithelium are similar in both states. (Is the influence of 
contrace ptive pills on vaginal epithelium what causes pain in 
intercourse?)  
Osteoporosis and diabetes are frequently part of Cush -
ing's syndrome, and are also more common after the men -
opause. Cortisone therapy (even when used on the skin) can 
cause mineral loss — recently an 8 year old girl who had  
41stopped  growing was found to have osteoporosis resulting 
from use of a cortisone ointment. Thyroxine elevates 
magnesium levels in the tissue and is known to promote bone 
regeneration and mineralization. Estrogen's antagonism to 
thyroxin is so general that we coul d suspect that it would also 
inhibit healthy mineralization. Estrogen has long been used 
during and after the menopause for its supposed ability to 
prevent osteoporosis, but this is now known to be incorrect: 
any beneficial effect it has on osteoporosis is  only temporary 
(C. Martin, Textbook of Endocrine Physiology, 1976).  
In animal experiments, it has been found that cortisone 
can produce diabetes, apparently by damaging the pan -
creas, and it has been suspected that chronic stress (which 
can be brought on by low blood sugar) can be a factor in 
producing diabetes.  
Aging, stress, menopause, Cushing's syndrome, and the 
premenstrual syndrome all overlap so much that each state 
can probably give us some insight into the others. An 
elevated estrogen/progesterone ratio is likely to be a com -
mon feature.  
CHOLESTEROL  
A recent newspaper article about a former Oregon 
politician says He was in excellent physical condition." "So 
for all these years, he hasn't smoked, he's kep t his weight 
down to his normal 165 pounds. He has cut down on eating 
fatty foods and has watched his diet carefully." "I was in 
good shape," he said in his hospital room after being treated 
for the nearly fatal heart attack he had while jogging. I quote 
this because it shows how taking certain stylish "precau -
tions" can give a person a false sense of security. Since a 
healthy liver will produce cholesterol to make up for what is 
lacking in the diet, avoiding high cholesterol foods won't 
necessarily lower b lood cholesterol. In an article called "Fat 
has less cholesterol than lean," Raymond Reiser of Texas A 
& M University points out that 100 grams of a chicken 
drumstick has 91 mg. of cholesterol, while pork has only 
about 60 mg. per 100 grams. "On the calori e basis," he 
says, the cholesterol content of lean cuts "is about 4 to 6.6 
times as high" as that of fat.  
Vitamin C is now known to lower blood cholesterol. Eggs 
are rich in cholesterol, but they also contain lecithin, which 
appears to make the cholesterol  useful, or at least less 
harmful. Niacin and vitamin E also help to regulate choles -
terol. High insulin levels, caused by eating sugar, seem to 
be important in allowing cholesterol to damage the blood 
vessels. Cholesterol is used in the production of many  
hormones, including sex and anti -stress hormones.  
42High cholesterol usually indicates low thyroid function. 
When thyroid is low, cholesterol isn't converted efficiently 
into progesterone. The real cause of heart attacks seems to 
be hypothyroi dism and its effects, including loss of magne-
sium. Stressful exercise can aggravate hypothyroidism.  
AGING SKIN  
Although estrogen is known to advance the aging of 
collagen in all tissues that have been studied, including 
skin, it has been promoted as a "yo uth drug." The beef 
industry uses it because it makes cows swell up with fat and 
water, to increase profits: it is no longer legal to soak meat 
— except ham — in water before weighing it for sale. 
Women, like cows, will puff up with water and fat under the  
influence of estrogen, and wrinkles will naturally be 
smoothed out, but the skin itself is actually losing its 
elasticity faster when estro gen is used. Testosterone and 
progesterone both have direct anti -estrogen activity. 
Testosterone lotion was tested on one armpit of an old 
woman. Her tissue had atrophied so  that there was no hair, 
the sweat glands didn't function, and the skin was thin and 
wrinkled. After several weeks of daily use of the lotion, hair and 
sweat  glands had returned to normal, and the skin was thicker, 
firmer, and smoother (photographs were published). Her other 
armpit remained as before. Progesterone has been found to 
reverse the chemical changes which occur in co llagen with 
aging. In pregnancy,  progesterone is probably responsible for  
the formation of relaxin, a hormone which makes the fibrous 
tissues become very stretchy, so the birth canal can open 
without damage. Some women notice that joints become very 
limber for a few days every month, suggesting that relaxin can 
be formed even w hen the woman is not pregnant.  
Some of the changes of aging probably relate to "auto-
immune" reactions, in which the body attacks itself; both 
testosterone and progesterone normalize the immune sys -
tem, suppressing auto- immune problems. There are several 
dietary practices which will promote the formation of 
progesterone, but the most effective is to use liver once a 
week, to use eggs daily, and to avoid foods which inhibit the 
thyroid, such as raw cabbage and broccoli. Butter contains 
some progesterone. You ng women might grow moustaches 
if they used testosterone cream on their skin very often (one 
day a month, at ovulation, women normally produce con -
siderable testosterone) but natural progesterone lotion could 
be used safely for its effect on collagen. Prog esterone has 
also been used to eliminate excess facial hair (photo graphs 
of this effect of progestins have been published in the J. of 
Steroid Biochemistry).  
Synthetic hormones are certai n to have side effects.
43ESTROGEN AND OSTEOPOROSIS, ETC.  
Estrogen has been promoted (on grounds that are at  
best dubious) as a therapy for menopause, for aging skin, 
for heart disease, for cancer , for premenstrual syndrome, 
for endometriosis, for preventing miscarriages, for 
nervousness  and depression, for abnormal bleeding, and for 
osteoporo sis. From Sept. 21, 1977, drug companies are 
required to give doctors and druggists brochures with 
estrogen, warning of  the risk of cancer, and advising that 
estrogen not be given for nervousness, depression, or for 
"restoring youthfulness"  during menopause, because it is 
ineffective for those pur poses (UPI, July 20 -21, 1977). 
However, they failed to mention studies which had 
already reported that estrogen  causes, rather than cures, 
heart attacks. It causes a magne sium d eficiency, which 
promotes clotting (Seelig and Heggtveit. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 
27, pp. 59 -79, 1974). The magnesium deficiency also 
promotes abnormal fat me tabolism, contributing to heart 
disease. Even before es trogen was chemically identified, 
it was known to promote breast cancer; in the 1930s it 
was shown to cause tissue aging, fibroid tumors, various 
cancers, premenstrual syn drome and menstrual 
abnormalities, and to induce abor tions. Nevertheless, from 
1947 to 1964 a synthetic estrogen,  DES, already 
demonstrated to be highly toxic, was pre scribed to millions 
of women to prevent miscarriages. When women succeeded 
in having babies in spite of this mistreatment, it typically 
caused girl babies to later develop vaginal cancer, and many of the boy babies grew up to be sterile. By  the early 1960s it 
was apparent that birth control drugs had a 
bigger market 
than drugs for the miscarriage trade, so DES was switched over to use in birth control pills, and is still  widely used as 
a morning after pill." Since estrogen was  
known to cause 
obesity and edema, it occurred to someone that there would be a really big market for DES in the meat  
industry: chickens, 
turkeys and cows with edema weigh more, and gross 
fatness not only increases the animals' weight, it also fi lls 
out the skin so the animal looks smooth and plump. (The 
same effect of plumpness has been sold to women as "young 
skin," even though estrogen actually  causes aging of the 
connective tissue in skin.) Meat graders have said that DES 
lowers the quality of  the meat (apart from the residue 
toxicity), but the increased weight makes it a profitable 
practice.  
By 1950, any normally perceptive person was aware 
that physicians were doing things exactly backwards in many 
cases. This was not the result of a new homeopathic philos - 
44sophy, or the "hair of the dog that bit you" theory. It was the 
result of drug companies' having their patented products, 
and knowing how to use the medical establishment for their 
own purposes, without regard to science. Their huge profits 
allowed them to spend several thousand dollars each year 
on each physician, sometimes including gifts of color 
television sets and free vacations, and discounts on things 
for the doctors' own use. Probably the most terrible use of 
their wealth was the gradual reversal of scientific opinion, 
achieved through grants to scientists who got the results 
they wanted, and cancellation of grants when the results 
went the wrong way, and through financial support for 
professional meetings and public ations, and through in -
fluence on the editorial policies of medical journals by the 
threatened withholding of advertising.  
Probably the last, strongest argument for the wides -
pread use of estrogen is that it supposedly delays the 
development of osteoporosi s. The absence of osteoporosis 
in old women in many other countries is never discussed in 
the professional meetings on osteoporosis subsidized by the 
drug companies. Constance Martin, in her Textbook of 
Endocrine Physiology, (1976), says that "estrogens ar e 
not useful if administered over long periods of time...."  
M.R . Urist (in Biochem. and Physiol. of Bone,  vol.2, G.H. 
Bourne, 1972 ed.) says that estrogen doesn't restore bone 
mass “to a degree demonstrable by roentgenography," that 
excessive growth hormo ne "may aggravate" the disorder, 
and that estrogen stimulates the release of growth hormone. 
The argument for using estrogen to cure or prevent 
osteoporosis is based on the fact that estrogen causes 
diminished urinary excretion of calcium. A vitamin E 
deficiency (and estrogen is known to increase the need for 
vitamin E) causes calcium to be retained by muscles. Any 
toxin, in fact, causes calcium retention in the soft tissues — 
for example, when the heart is deprived of oxygen, it absorbs 
calcium. Since no s keletal improvement can be demonstrated 
by x -rays, I suspect that the improved calcium retention is 
merely a toxic effect of estrogen. A proper control in this sort 
of experiment would be to compare the effect of toxins such 
as iodoacetate and cyanide, wit h the effect of estrogen.  
BLOOD PRESSURE - VITAMIN E AND OTHER NUTRIENTS  
The kidneys produce a material which raises blood pres -
sure, and the production of this chemical is increased when 
the supply of oxygen is not adequate. Other tissues probably 
produce  similar chemicals. Normally, as soon as the blood 
pressure is increased, circulation is improved so that an 
adequate amount of oxygen is delivered to the tissues.  
45However, there are many processes that can waste oxygen, 
and some of these ten d to increase gradually with age, so 
that the blood pressure rises steadily over the years.  
General tissue damage, malnutrition, and hormone 
imbalance can all produce conditions in which oxygen is 
consumed without producing a normal amount of energy. 
Also,  a failure of the small blood vessels to open properly 
can cause oxygen deprivation, as can a tendency to form 
small clots.  
All kinds of stress tend to make the liver sluggish. The 
liver normally removes toxins and excess hormones from the 
body. Estrogen can accumulate to high levels if the liver isn't 
fully active. One effect of estrogen is to promote oxidation of 
a type which doesn't provide energy, thus raising oxygen 
requirements. Another effect of estrogen is to inhibit a 
proteolytic enzyme in the blo od, which normally dissolves 
clots. This is why birth control pills can cause blood clotting, 
strokes and other circulatory problems. Some of the long -
recognized signs of excessive estrogen are vascular 
"spiders," little red dots that some doctors like to burn off, 
brown spots on the skin, lumps in the breasts, a slight bluish 
color in some skin areas, puffiness, dizziness, etc.  
Vitamin E promotes oxidation in many ways, and seems 
to specifically oppose many of the effects of excess es -
trogen. For example, it can help protect the liver against 
damage by toxins (all the nutrients are needed by the liver 
though). It opposes the tendency of estrogen to create "age 
pigment." It activates the blood protease, and so speeds clot 
removal and prevents clot formation inside blood vessels, 
but there is also evidence that it promotes normal clotting in 
wounds. The products of dissolving the proteins of clots are 
small peptide molecules called kinins, which act as local 
hormones to relax the walls of blood vessels, allowi ng easier 
flow of blood, better oxygenation, and lower blood pressure. 
Inside the cells, vitamin E inhibits destructive and wasteful 
oxidation (such as is involved in aging and cancer) and 
makes the normal oxidative process more efficient, providing 
more useful energy for a given amount of oxygen.  
One theory of vitamin E action is that it protects proges -
terone. A recent discovery is that a prostaglandin (a 
hormone made from fatty acids) regulates blood pressure via 
the kidney — vitamin E protects fatty aci ds. 
Recently it has been found that some natural vitamin E 
is contaminated with estrogen from the plant source, e.g., 
alfalfa.  
Part of the reason for the common medical disbelief in 
the efficacy of vitamin E is that it doesn't work like a drug — a 
big dose doesn't immediately force the blood pressure down. 
Sometimes, in fact, the first effect is to strengthen a damaged 
heart, raising the blood pressure for a few days. But it does  
46eventually remove many of the causes of high blood pres -
sure, and I have never seen it fail to lower high blood 
pressure.  Synthetic vitamin E is dl -alpha tocopherol, and may 
be associated with the reports of fatigue and headache from 
800 units a day (however, this often repeated rumor is hard 
to track down — sort of like stories of blindness from vitamin 
A or LSD). Some "natural" vitamin E brands are 
contaminated with the petroleum distillate used for extrac -
tion, and taste like kerosene; the name d -alpha tocopherol 
indicates that it has been extracted from natural oi ls and has 
the "handedness" (chirality) of most biological substances (d 
and l mean right and left).  
Other vitamins that can improve circulation by opening 
the small blood vessels are folic acid and niacin. Vitamin C 
can help to eliminate toxins that could  contribute to high 
blood pressure. Trace minerals (such as those found in kelp 
and bran) and magnesium should also be considered in 
circulatory problems. Magnesium acts against calcium (and 
estrogen) in the clotting system, can prevent spasms of 
blood ves sels, and can spare oxygen.  
According to Barnes, nearly all hypertension can be helped 
with thyroid.  
IV. SOME DISEASES  
NEARSIGHTEDNESS (MYOPIA)  
Many years ago I noticed that my nearsightedness 
increased when I was under stress. Many people become 
slightly nearsighted at night, or in the dark. Since the blood 
sugar concentration decreases at night, and under certain 
stress conditions, I guessed that myopia might be caused by 
chronic deficiency of sugar supply to the eye. This idea was 
reinforced when I read that tears normally contain more 
glucose than do the other body fluids, and then found that my 
tears usually had less sugar than the eyes of people with 
normal vision or with farsightedness. I found that many 
people (not just diabetic, whose altered refrac tion is usually 
blamed on swelling of the eyeball) had experienced very 
rapid and large changes in their degree of nearsightedness. 
In young women, I found that it was very common for them to 
become myopic within weeks of the time they began taking 
birth c ontrol pills, and that their vision sometimes corrected 
itself when they stopped taking the pill after a year or two. In 
women who were on the pill, and then began taking thyroid 
hormone, the thyroxin tended to correct their vision. Since 
estrogen tends to  lower the blood sugar level, and thyroxin 
tends to raise it, these observations are consistent with the  
47idea that myopia is caused by a deficiency of glucose in the 
eye. In the walls of the eyes of chickens, cells which look 
like smooth muscle cells are present. If smooth muscles in 
the wall of the eyeball are responsible for maintaining the 
roundness of the eye , against the near -focus apparatus 
around the lens, then chronic starvation of those cells would 
lead to elongation of the eyeball (in proportion to the amount 
of close work), producing myopia. Besides avoiding the pill, 
all of the anti -estrogen and anti -stress nutrients should help 
to prevent the progression of myopia, and being outside in 
good weather — to promote the tear flow — might even 
reverse it, as thyroid hormone does.  
COLITIS, REGION AL ENTERITIS (CROHN'S DISEASE), 
INFLAMMATION, AND FIBROUS DISEAS ES, AND 
"COLLAGEN DISEASE"  
Stress consumes steroids and produces the many 
degenerative diseases described by Hans Selye. The gas -
tro-intestinal system becomes inflamed or ulcerated, and 
fibrous tissue may proliferate. Adrenal glands enlarge, and 
lymphoid t issue shrinks during the first stage of stress (and 
may enlarge later). Stress can be produced by dark cloudy 
northern winters, by inadequate nutrition, by the use of 
estrogen and many other drugs, and by the use of foods 
which inhibit the thyroid gland (b akery bread, lacking 
available manganese and containing iodate and bromate; 
cabbage family, and many cereals and nuts containing 
nitriles, cyanide or thiocyanate; meats "refined" from an -
imals whose thyroid tissue is sold to drug companies).  
Stress disease s typically have a dominant allergic 
aspect,  and respond to steroids. Cortisone is used 
medically, but has side effects which could be avoided by 
using progesterone (though "medical" progesterone usually 
contains allergenic solvents and "preservatives" su ch as 
phen ol). Niacin, vitamin A, vitamin C, etc., help to produce 
progesterone, and so often help in stress diseases, though 
the manufactured substances are themselves somewhat 
allergenic. (Vitamin A is not usually "manufactured.")  
Light deprivation can be remedied artificially, but the 
necessary brightness is usually underestimated. Because an 
adequate diet is hard to get in our culture, which makes it 
illegal to sell the thyroid gland as food, it is often necessary to 
buy this powdered meat in tablet form from your physician and 
druggist. Meat eaters would normally get 1/4 to 1/2 grain of 
thyroid in their food every day if the whole animal were used. 
Eggs, sard ines, oysters, chicken stew (non- estrogenized 
chickens), etc., are examples of 'unrefined" protein foods 
which shouldn't interfere with thyroid function. Vegetarians  
48often notice temporary exhilaration when they stop eating 
meat, probably bec ause their thyroid has been suppressed. 
But a more serious hypothyroid state often follows, from a 
low protein inadequate vegetarian diet. Low protein diets 
definitely interfere with the liver's ability to detoxify 
estrogen and other stressors.  
A diet high in animal protein with other nutrients, 
including an appropriate amount of desiccated thyroid  if 
"refined" proteins are used,  can cause an immediate im -
provement in many diseases which are specifically 
produced by stress.  
HEART DISEASE  
There are several r easons to suspect that a magnesium 
deficiency is often involved in heart disease; in a clinical 
study, for example, injected magnesium sulphate helped in 
angina pectoris and coronary thrombosis, and tended to 
lower blood lipids. Numerous studies have found  that a high 
magnesium intake is associated with low blood cholesterol 
levels. Magnesium also opposes clot formation and vascular 
spasm, which can be promoted by an excess of calcium. 
Estrogen was once used to "prevent" heart attacks, but it is 
now known to induce heart attacks in both men and women. 
Vascular spasm is now recognized as a cause of heart 
attacks.  
The Shutes have done extensive research on the use of 
vitamin E in heart disease, and found that "phar macologi cal" 
doses of 400 mg/day or more are beneficial. They have also 
recommended it for preventing thrombosis elsewhere in the 
vascular system. In problems such as varicose veins and 
clots in the legs, they say:  
It mobilizes collateral or detour circulation about 
the obstructed veins in the deep parts of the leg. It is the best and safest agent one can use. It not 
only melts away the existing clot and helps the 
inflammatory process to subside, but it hinders extension of that process and almost never per mits 
a part of the clot to break loose and strike some other part of the body, such as the lungs or brain (an accident called embolism). We feel that vitamin 
E is very effective in preventing thrombo sis within 
the vascular system, and acts more simply, more 
cheaply and much more safely than the rival 
anticoagulants.  
Other points relating to heart disease are discussed in 
the section on high blood pressure. Low thyroid is known to 
be a cause of both heart attacks and of elevated blood 
cholesterol. (B.Barnes; Ad v. in Lipid Res.)  
49ARTERIOSCLEROSIS  
The American Dietetic Association warns about over -
dosing with kelp, because of the iodide; but the Japanese eat 
various iodide -rich seaweeds without the thyroid problems 
the A.D.A. says might occur on the kelp -lecithin -vinegar B6 
diet. In the U.S. people who eat bakery bread receive about 
10 times more th an the RDA of iodine. Iodides are known to 
benefit arteriosclerosis, with visible improvement occurring in 
blood vessels in the retina (see Physicians Desk Reference, 
iodides). In old age, the walls of blood vessels tend to 
become hardened with calcium. In  at least some tissues, it 
is known that calcification begins in degenerating mitochon -
dria, and mitochondria tend to deteriorate in aging tissue. 
Nutrients such as iodine, vi tamin E, magnesium and vitamin 
B2 are especially important for maintaining the fu nction of 
the mitochondria, which produce most of our energy. An 
excess of iodine from bread or kelp is much more likely to 
interfere with the thyroid when the diet contains a large 
amount of unsaturated fat, such as safflower or soy oil, 
because these com bine with iodine to form substances 
which inhibit the thyroid. These oils in themselves suppress 
the thyroid, and this might be a factor in the premature 
aging and increased cancer rate which have been observed 
in people who use larger amounts of those oil s. 
Atherosclerotic damage (fatty deposits) of blood 
vessels is made worse by sugar supposedly, since insulin is 
involved in cholesterol damage. There is evidence that 
lecithin and  other phospholipids protect the body against 
fatty degener ation. Eggs, for several reasons might actively 
protect against the formation of cholesterol deposits. One of 
the men who discovered insulin, Best, later showed that 
choline (a component of lecithin) can prevent fatty 
degeneration of the liver. Very large doses of biotin c ause 
experimental animals to develop fatty livers (developing into 
liver cancer), but this effect can be offset by feeding the 
animal another B vitamin, inositol. Some of these effects 
have been known for about half a century, but too many 
"health professi onals" are still pretending that no valid data 
exist. Maybe we should start asking whether these "health 
professionals" have a valid existence.  
POLIO: A CHRONOLOGY  
(OR, ISN'T SCIENCE WONDERFUL?)  
Muller in Switzerland in 1830 built the steel roller wheat mill. 
Jacob von Heine first diagnosed polio, 1840.  
50First polio epidemic, Sweden, 1887.  
Epidemic in some region of U.S. almost every year after 
1900.  
In 1952, epidemics in Denmark, Germany, Belgium, 33,344 
cases in U.S.  
An epidemic of rumors that Mexicans didn't get polio 
because of the absence of white bread and sugar in their 
country. (Sugar refining developed in Europe roughly 
paral lel with flour refining.) The white flour producers 
financed research by a Harvard group to find the cause of  
Mexicans' apparent resistance to polio. The Harvard 
scientists con cluded that Mexicans are so dirty that they 
are constantly eating the polio virus and so never catch 
the disease.  
According to Harrison's Principles of Internal 
Medicine, polio can be spre ad by injection, including 
vaccination. Salk vaccine in many cases apparently 
brought on polio after the first or second injection in the 
series of three. Studies in which people were advised to 
avoid sugar and starch during the (summer) "polio 
season" nev er got government or institutional support. 
However, some studies were done: see the section on 
infections.  
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 
Roger MacDougall's diet for preventing the 
progression of multiple sclerosis involves avoidance of 
gluten and the use of a vitamin -mineral supplement. A 
letter in The Lancet (Oct. 5, 1974) describes one form of 
the diet: "subject avoids eating wheat, oats,  rye and 
barley...takes less saturated fat, replacing it in part by 
unsaturated fat, reduces his sugar intake, replacing the 
remaining white sugar by Barbados sugar, and 
supplements his intake of food with" the follow ing: 
Vitamin B1  24 mg. (per day)  
Vitam in B2  12 mg.  
Vitamin B6  60 mg.  
Nicotinamide  1 gram  
Calcium Pantothenate  120 mg.  
Vitamin C  600 mg.  
Vitamin E  180 mg.  
Calcium gluconate  900 mg.  
Magnesium hydroxide  900 mg.  
Vitamin B12  150 micrograms  
That writer suggests that the calcium might not be 
desirable in the formula. I think the magnesium is 
extremely important, and it might be better to use it in a 
more soluble form, such as magnesium carbonate or 
magnesium chloride, or even  
51epsom  salts (magnesium sulphate) which in large doses 
can't be absorbed, but in small doses will be partly 
converted  to the chloride by stomach acid. Some people, 
suspected of having early MS, have been able to stop the 
symptoms just by  avoiding carbohydrates. Biotin is involved 
in the synthesis of  fats in the nervous system, and so should 
probably be given special attention in the MS diet. Liver is a 
good source of it. If  it is taken as a supplement, inositol 
(and probably choline) should be taken with it, because 
large doses of biotin by itself were toxic in animal 
experiments.  
Stress, the immune system, and lipid metabolism have 
complex interactions. For example, a fat, triolein, is known 
to stimulate phagocytosis, as does magnesium; sugar in 
the diet has an o pposite effect. Stress increases 
breakdown of fats, and can decrease the proportion of 
triglycerides (triolein is a triglyceride, meaning it is 
composed of glycerin and three fatty acid molecules) in the 
blood. Avoiding stress (coffee, tea, and other stimu lants 
produce a stress -like reaction in many people) should be 
part of a multiple sclerosis program. 
Steroids have been used apparently to inhibit an 
inflammatory process,  though it was about 1978 before an 
active brain inflammation was observed in a person who 
died with MS. Good nutrition would support the synthesis of natural steroids. Hypothyroidism can mimic the neurological 
problems of MS, but neurologists are generall
y willing to 
diagnose a condition as MS without giving thyroid tests. 
Vitamin A is needed for steroid production and should be 
added to MacDougall's program. I think beans and nuts 
should be avoided as well as the grains.  
Polyunsaturated oils inhibit the i mmune system and so 
probably suppress symptoms. The steroids (e.g., progester -
one) and thyroid hormones normalize the immune system when they are present in normal amounts.  
INFECTIONS  
In the winter of 1974 a young professor visited me to talk 
about Blake College, and we started talking about nutrition 
and health. After I told him some stories about antibiotics and 
vitamin A, he mentioned that he had a chronic, active and 
uncomfortable infection of the urethra (non -specific ureth ritis, 
a bacterial infection of the urinary canal, usually involving E. 
coli, the common intestinal bacteria, and less often Proteus, 
Staphylococcus aureus, Enterobacter, Pseudomonas, etc.) for 
nearly two years. Twice he had been given a month's course 
of high potency antibiotics, which 
52suppressed the symp toms while he continued to take them, 
but the condition returned immediately when he stopped  
taking the antibiotics. He was interested in trying to  
nutri tionally raise his immunity, so I gave him liver for 
lunch, and suggested that he eat some daily, and gave him 
a week's  supply of vitamins A, E, folic acid, B6, 
potassium and  magnesium. He was scheduled to come 
back to town in a week, so I asked him to let me know how 
he felt then. About a  day later, he came back in a very 
surprised state, and said the infection had already 
completely cleared up. This spring (1975) he came back and 
is still free of the infection. This sort of infection is more 
common in women, and usually takes longer to clear up.  
Folic acid, known for its ability to cure some 
anemias (red blood cell deficiency) also improves the 
function of  white blood cells, improving antibody 
production. It is also  possibly involved in a non- antibod y 
process which allows white blood cells to destroy virus, 
fungi, and other parasites. Vitamin A, besides 
strengthening membranes, is necessary for protein 
synthesis, and so helps form the  immune tissue. Zinc has 
similar general functions in protein  antibo dy production, but 
also possibly has a direct "vir icidal" capacity, as 
observed in vitro, which would account for its release (and 
loss) during viral infections. Vitamin A (and possibly  folic 
acid) mediate the body's  response to light, and so modify its 
neural control of immunity, thyroid and adrenal and sex 
hormone function, etc.  
Unsaturated fatty acids inhibit some immune functions 
and also inhibit the thyroid gland and directly inhibit cellular  
respiration. As Brod a Barnes has pointed out, hypothyr -
oidism predisposes people to infections; chronic respiratory, 
ear, and bladder infections are common results.  
Vitamin C increases the structural strength of the 
mucous membranes' connective tissue, in proportion to its 
intake, up to the megadoses recommended by Pauling 
(according to electron microscope evidence, J. Clin. Nutr., 
summer, 1974). It is also more concentrated in white blood 
cells than in any other tissue (about a 60 to one ratio 
between white blood cells and su rrounding fluids), and their 
immune function depends on its presence in adequate 
amounts. Up to 200 mg. daily intake, vitamin C concentration 
in blood and  tissues increases rapidly, and the kidneys work 
to reabsorb it; at about that intake, the kidney's ab ility to 
conserve it  becomes " saturated", so tha t higher doses are 
retained at l ower efficiency. The increased body retention of  
vitamin C when 5 grams per day is taken is about 4 times 
that of 100 mg. per day.  
53Zinc and vitamin A may also act through the blood 
sugar. It is well known that an emotional upset, spending too 
much time in the sun, working too long without eating, etc., 
can bring on an attack of herpes ("cold sores", for example): 
low blood sugar probably precipitates the eruption. Polio 
outbreaks always occurred  in the summer when people tend 
to eat more carbohydrate (because of the lower specific 
dynamic action, relative to protein — it heats the body less 
for a given amount of energy). B.F. Sandler wrote a book on 
nutri tion for avoiding polio (H.G. Muller -Verlag, Krailing bei 
Munchen, 1959) in which he claimed that infection with the 
polio virus is only possible if the blood sugar goes below 80 
mg. per cent. If this is true of the herpes virus, it would 
suggest a reason for the association of cancer with both 
herpes and estrogen, since estrogen lowers blood sugar, 
and both the virus and estrogen can cause tissue irritation 
and cell division. Vitamin A is being used experimentally to 
prevent cancer and to reverse precancer ous conditions, 
especially in the cervix and the mouth. Many women have 
premenstrual herpes outbreaks which can be controlled with 
progesterone or thyroid.  
P. Delbet used physiological magnesium chloride 
(12.1 grams per liter) to stimulate phagocytosis in white 
blood cells. The activity was more than doubled by 
injection of 150 cc. of this solution into a dog, or by 
application to cells in vitro. (See Magnesium: the Nutrient 
that Could Change Your Life, J.I. Rodale, Pyramid, New 
York, 1968.) Dr. U.D. Regist er, of the School of Health at 
Loma Linda University, has done related work that shows 
a decline of white blood cell activity with increased sugar 
in the diet.  
FOOD ALLERGIES  
Cooking, by altering the proteins, can lower the 
allergic reaction to many foods.  Soaking seeds before 
cooking them can have the same effect. Storing foods 
such as seeds in a sealed bottle in the refrigerator will 
slow the deterioration of oils, and rancid oils can be very 
toxic and irritating. Many people lose their allergies (even 
hay fever and poison- oak sensitivity) when they take 
supplements of the vitamins A, C, and pantothenic acid.  
Plants evolved special toxins to protect their seeds from 
animals, so "seed poisoning" is probably a more accurate 
description than "allergy to grain s, nuts, 
Heat will destroy some seed toxins, but it also  
54creates new poisons and damages the protein quality. 
For example, heat cause lysine to react with sugars, 
forming a carcin ogen.  
Plants evolved special toxins to protect their seeds  
from animals, so "seed poisoning" is probably a more 
accurate description than "allergy to grains, nuts, 
legumes, seeds." Low thyroid function leads to poor 
digestion and to hypo glycemia, both of which make an 
allergic reaction more likely . 
A NOTE ON GLA UCOMA 
Because of their stress -like effects, coffee and 
tobacco should be avoided in glaucoma. The nutrients that 
are especially involved in the adrenal stress reaction 
should be used: ascorbic acid, pantothenic acid, riboflavin, 
vitamin A, magnesium, and vitamin E.  
Progesterone (natural form) is a diuretic and also is a 
precursor for the anti -stress hormones, and sometimes 
helps glaucoma. The nutrients mentioned above promote 
its synthesis. Estrogen blocks its actions, so it would 
seem desirable to "avoid estrogen, and to use the 
nutrients which oppose estrogen.  
The eye itself has especially high requirements for 
vitamins A, B2, and niacin, and coenzyme Q.  
Salt and water metabolism involve vitamins B6, pan -
tothenic acid, A, C, E, and niacin (see R.J. Kutsky , 
Handbook of Vitamins and Hormones, p. 263), and 
various minerals (other than sodium) including 
magnesium, potassium and zinc.  
Because of the role of carbon dioxide in circulation, 
vitamins B1, B6, and biotin, and zinc, should also be con-
sidered. Choline is now known to stimulate acetylcholine 
synthesis, and so might help to promote a normal 
parasym pathetic innervation.  
INSOMNIA  
A few weeks ago a woman, in her 40s and taking 
estrogen pills by prescription, was complaining of extreme 
insomnia and other sy mptoms. I suggested that she might 
be getting too much estrogen, so she stopped, and 
immediately was able to sleep normally. Sometimes a few 
hundred milligrams of magnesium carbonate per day (or a 
spoonful of epsom salts, if this dose is divided into 
sever al parts to avoid the laxative effect) will immediately 
make it possible to sleep normally. Zinc, as in oysters, 
and potassium and the B complex vitamins, as in brewer's 
yeast, are sometimes necessary. Many people get gas 
from the complex carbohy - 
55drates in yeast. This can be prevented by steeping a table -
spoonful in a cup of boiling water, and drinking only the 
yellow liquid and throwing away the sediment. Protein is 
lost, but the other nutrients are highly soluble. Milk contains 
natural sleep -inducers, including the amino acid tryptophan 
and milk sugar. Two or three tablespoonfuls of honey in a 
glass of milk will provide some magnesium, as well as sugar 
to increase the liver's stored glycogen. When blood sugar is 
low, adrenalin is  secreted to raise the sugar level, but it also 
tends to keep the person awake, by causing nightmares, 
sweating, rapid heartbeat, etc. Since blood sugar is normally 
higher in the daytime, because of light's effect on various 
glands, some people with defect ive livers find it easier to 
sleep in the daytime. Hypothyroidism is the most common 
basic cause of low blood sugar, and very commonly causes 
insomnia. I have noticed that "bedtime worries" are as -
sociated with hypothyroidism, and disappear when it is 
corrected.  
Although tryptophan supplements are available for 
insomnia, I think its chronic use would be as dangerous as 
the tranquilizer, reserpine, which acts on the same bio -
chemical system, and which increases the risk of breast 
cancer.  
LOW BLOOD PRESSURE  
Some doctors say that lower than average blood pres sure 
is a good thing. Many women have a systolic pressure of 
around 100, and I think rightly suspect that it relates to their 
feelings of weakness or fatigue or even dizziness. Sometimes 
orthostatic hypot ension, the failure of blood pressure to rise 
when the person stands up, is described as "dizziness." A 
relative deficiency of the catecholamines can produce these 
symptoms.  
For several years I had suspected a connection between 
estrogen and low blood pres sure, just from noticing that 
women with seemingly high estrogen tended to have lower 
than average blood pressure. The fact that estrogen, acting 
as an antagonist to vitamin E, could promote high blood 
pressure had distracted my attention from the opposite  
effect, being produced by an antagonism to thyroxin. It was 
enough of a heresy, for the moment, to point out the many 
ways in which estrogen antagonizes thyroxin; in addition to 
things I have mentioned elsewhere, I think the opposition is 
also visible in the action of estrogen on blood lipids. Since 
aging and x -rays have some biochemical effects similar to 
those of estrogen, they might also antagonize thyroxin; this 
suggests that large doses of thyroxin might be used in 
senility, radiation sickness, and ca ncer.  
56Since thyroxine potentiates adrenalin, which maintains 
blood pressure, excess estrogen, antagonizing thyroid, could 
tend to lower blood pressure through this system. The 
thermogenic effect of progesterone might act by way of 
thyroxin; if so, it might be th e best way of counteracting 
estrogen and promoting thyroxin activity. The opposite reaction 
to high estrogen -low thyroid is also known to occur: an 
elevation of brain catecholamines and also an elevation of 
blood pressure. Thus, a thyroid supplement can of ten 
correct hypertension, as well as hypotension.  
SKIN FEEDING  
Oily things enter the body very easily through the skin. 
Toxic solve nts should never touch the skin, just as they never 
should be breathed. Oily vitamins and hormones can be 
applied to the skin. There is a form of vitamin C (ascorbic 
palmitate ) which enters the skin quickly,  and according to the 
Sovi et researchers who developed it,  can be used to carry 
other nutrients in through the skin. Significant quanti ties of fat 
(such as olive oil) can be given by massage when the person 
is too sick to eat. For years people have noticed that zinc 
oxide ointment speeds healing, just as zinc in the di et 
improves hea ling. Zinc chloride dissolved in vegetable oil was 
found to raise blood zinc very effectively when painted onto 
the skin. Zinc has been used successfully to treat stretch 
marks. Probably other minerals will enter the skin as easily — 
magnesium sulphate (ep som salts) is a traditional treatment 
for inflammations. Since carbon dioxide dissolves best in "oil 
loving" material such as the skin, it enters the body even 
against a concentration gradient. Adding baking soda to an 
epsom salts soak should make it more effective. Mineral oil, 
vaseline, and rancid vegetable oil should not be put on the 
skin. Lotions and other cosmetics generally contain mineral 
oil. 
IDENTIFYING DEFICIENCIES  
Frequent nosebleeds, bloodshot eyes. and visible blood 
vessels on the cheeks and n ose can be symptoms of a 
deficiency of vitamin B2. Vitamin C, rutin. and iodide are 
other nutrients that can sometimes correct blood vessel 
problems.  
A peculiar kind of irritability, sometimes with a sense of 
having your head in a kind of "cloud", is often  a result of a 
vitamin B1 d eficiency. If that is the cause,  it will clear up 
within a few minutes after taking the vitamin. Magnesium 
deficiency is another common cause of irritability.  
57White stripes across the finger -nails, especially on the  
right hand, seem to represent a zinc deficiency. 
Menstruation can cause loss of zinc, so that some women 
have five or six spots evenly spaced up the length of the 
nail, each resulting from one period. The length of the nail 
represents about six months' gr owth. A virus infection can 
have the same effect. The eyebrows sometimes become 
bristly in a zinc deficiency. A zinc deficiency is often as -
sociated with a deficiency of vitamin B6 and an excess of 
copper; since estrogen is associated with zinc loss, other  
nutrients including vitamin E and folic acid should be 
considered when the nails have white marks.  
Sore spots at the sides of the mouth often result from a 
vitamin B2 deficiency; other B vitamin deficiencies can 
cause a sore tongue, and a niacin or protei n deficiency can 
show up first in the gums as tenderness or bleeding. (A 
thyroid deficiency contributes to receding and bleeding 
gums, pyorrhea, etc. A recent book on Ubiquinone, 
coenzyme Q, shows that gums heal rapidly when the person 
consumes a ubiquinon e supplement. This nutrient is found in 
heart, liver, greens, etc., and is closely related to both 
vitamin E and thyroid hormones.)  
Teeth that are sensitive to heat or cold suggest a 
deficiency of calcium, magnesium, or vitamin D. Blood sugar 
and calcium s eem to be related, and a dental researcher has 
shown that teeth are sensitive to alterations in the blood 
sugar concentration. Cramps, especially in the feet and legs 
can result from a deficiency of these same nutrients.  
Weak fingernails are common in prot ein deficiency and 
hypothyroidism. Falling or very fine hair also suggest 
hypothyroidism, which can result from stress or eating anti -
thyroid foods. Many other symptoms are discussed in 
sections on progesterone, thyroid and estrogen.  
WARBURG'S CANCER THEORY, CACHEXIA  
AND THYROID THERAPY  
Warburg1 demonstrated that all cancers have defec -
tive respiration, by which he meant that glucose is con -
sumed too rapidly. The excessive consumption of glucose 
in the presence of oxygen is called aerobic glycolysis, and 
is typical of cancer. Oxygen may be con sumed, but it does 
not result in the production of suffi cient ATP to inhibit 
glycolysis (by the Pasteur Effect ). This generally means 
that excess lactate will be produced and will leave the 
cell, will be detected by other tissues, and will be 
processed by the liver into glucose. Lactate is a sufficient 
stimulus to trigger the stress reaction, and in  
58many people causes an anxiety syndrome. Since resyn -
thesis of glucose from lactat e by the liver requires much 
more energy than is derived from conversion of glucose to 
lactate, the tumor's formation of lactate constitutes  a large 
energy burden to the organism. Total energy con sumption 
would increase, because of intense but ineffi cient 
metabolism in the tumor and in the liver, and also possibly 
because of stress -induced brain excitation and the 
catabolism of muscle and other tissue proteins. Cor tisone 
elevates blood glucose and would inhibit the thyroid. Since 
there is evidence of thy roid deficiency in various cancers, 
and since thyroid supplementation reduces the incidence 
of spontaneous tumors, thyroid therapy would be desirable 
in cancer, especially if there is cachexia. Gerson2 and 
Tallberg3 have reported good results from using th yroid as 
part of supportive therapy.  
The stereotype of the hypothyroid person as over -
weight will lead the typical physician to believe that 
metabolic stimulation by thyroid would be exactly the op -
posite of what the cachectic patient needs. The relevant 
effects of thyroid (especially with progesterone, to promote 
tissue response to thyroid, and to block cortisone 
production) however, are stimulation of protein synthesis 
and the prevention of lactat e formation - or the stimula tion 
of its oxidation, either by the tumor itself or by other 
tissues, to prevent its entry into the Cori cycle, for 
gluconeogenesis. (Cachexia strumipriva should be kept in 
mind).  
Warburg believed that a riboflavin deficiency was an 
important contributor to the development of defective 
respiration, but he also pointed out that the simple lack of 
oxygen would promote the development of cancer. I have 
emphasized the role of estrogen in creating an oxygen 
deficiency. Since it inhi bits the secretion of thyroxin at the 
glandular level, and antagonizes  thyroxin at the cellular 
level, estrogen is a good candidate for the main cause of the 
respiratory defect. It also antagonizes other respiratory 
factors, such as magnesium and vitamin E , and radioactive 
estrogen has been shown to accumulate selectively in (liver) 
cancer cells. (And excess estrogen actually impedes 
oxygenation of the blood.)  
59Once we accept Warburg's thesis, that damaged 
respiration is the prime cause of canc er, the therapeutic 
use of thyroid in cancer seems obvious. Schizophrenics 
seem to have either a resistance to thyroid hormones or 
an inability to convert T4 to T3. Aging and estrogen -
dominance are other states in which cells seem to be 
relatively insensitive to thyroid hormones. If the liver is a 
main site of T4's conversion to T3, cancer patients may 
require very large doses of thyroid, or else direct use of 
T3 (possibly in large doses), since the liver is so likely to 
be inefficient.  
1Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Metabolism of Tumors, R.R. 
Smith, Inc., New York, 1931.  
2Max Gerson, A Cancer Therapy, Whitier Books, New York, 
1958.  
3 Tallberg, Protides  of the Body Fluids, 1978.  
CANCER, STRESS, AND NUTRITION: A SUMMARY 
Cancer lives on sugar. It disturbs metabolism, tending to 
lower blood sugar (even to the point of causing hallucina -
tions) and promotes the conversion of good tissue into 
sugar: the liver and the immune tissue are the first to show 
this effect. Stress first elevates adrenaline, which causes 
fear and anxiety; adrenaline then stimulates the body to 
produce cortisone. If nutrients, especially vitamins C and A, 
are available the adrenal glands will produce cortisone to 
maintain the blood sugar as long as some good body tissue 
remains to convert to sugar, unless adaptation occurs.  
If the body can adapt to get most of its energy from fat 
oxidation, then blockage of sugar metabolism can lead to 
starvation of the cancer. A magnesium deficiency damages 
energy production and leads to high sugar consumption, 
with the associated tendency to destroy protein. During 
healthy adaptation to fasting, the body consumes fat prefer - 
entially — the brain is usually the biggest consumer of  
glucose, and it can adapt in about two weeks to oxidize 
mainly fat, as ketones. In this state, the kidneys (as well  as 
any cancer) will consume protein and produce ammonia 
and fuel; the kidneys synthesize gluco se (estimated at 
roughly 40 grams per day) from the protein, but the reason 
for this reaction seems to be the need for ammonium ions 
to balance the keto acids which are being eliminated in the 
urine. If the need for positive ions regulates this conversion 
of protein to  
60glucose, then the wasting of the body and the production of 
glucose could be reduced even more by providing positive 
ions — as carbonates, or carbonate precursors to be 
chosen by their tendency to stimulate respiration rather  than 
gluconeogenesis (possibly citrate or acetate, though acetate 
might inhibit lipolysis; these anions would be needed in 
such small amounts that their effects might be negligible). 
The cations would be chosen for their ability to regulate 
many aspects o f metabolism, including glycolysis, 
respiration, hormone secretion, and immunity. They would 
include, in order of probable quantities, magnesium, zinc, 
manganese, and molybdenum. Certain fruits probably 
approximate the ionic balance needed.  
Very high eleva tions produce hormonal and metabolic 
adaptations which are appropriate for recovery from cancer. 
(See S. Tromp's Medical Biometeorology, and F.Z. Meyer -
son's work in the Soviet Union.) Even moderate increases in 
elevation lower the cancer rate (see referen ces in my article 
on the "excitable ether").  
Vitamin A is needed for proper differentiation of various 
types of cell, and has been used successfully in blocking 
cancer formation and in causing precancerous tissue to 
return to normal. Progesterone "spares" vitamin A, and has 
been used in cancer therapy. Iodine has a long history of 
use in cancer therapy; the tissue lump produced by 
tuberculosis bacilli has some similarity to tumor formation in 
cancer (this was an idea behind the use of a harmless form 
of the  tuber culosis organism, BCG, in cancer therapy to 
stimulate the immune rejection system). Iodine was found to 
restore activity to proteolytic enzymes which are inhibited by 
TB, and allow dissolution of the nodule. Progesterone and 
vitamin A interact with the thyroid hormone; when body 
temperature is below normal there is typically a 
progesterone deficiency (or estrogen excess, which may be 
functionally equivalent to a thyroid deficiency). Normal 
inhibitors of cell division (chalones) are not retained in ce lls 
at a normal level when ATP and vitamin E are deficient. 
Rapid growth is obviously one factor which could make it 
difficult to obtain adequate levels of some nutrients, such as 
the oily vitamins A, K, E, and D, just as wasteful use of 
oxygen can rob adj acent tissues and lead to spreading of the 
inflammation. ATP normally circulates in the blood in 
amounts reflecting cellular ef ficiency. Just as rigor mortis 
can be softened by injection of ATP, the hardness of a tumor 
probably reflects ATP deficiency (so ftening of cervical 
tumors was observed during progesterone treatment). 
Intravenous ATP (it could be purified by patient's own serum 
proteolytic enzyme before use to avoid immune reaction) 
should be considered as part of a physiological therapy. 
Magnesium salt of ATP is the appropriate form.  
61Intravenous ethanol prevents protein wastage without 
providing glucose to feed cancer; it controls pain as well as 
morphine with less toxicity. It can also be used as a skin rub, 
again bypassing the liver.  Magnesium carbonate can be given 
by any route, though it would have to be buffered 
intravenously. (5% ethanol has been used intravenously, 
safely.)  
Pyrroles and porphyrins in blood and urine, if elevated, 
suggest that therapies should continue, even if sy mptoms have 
disappeared.  
Nutrition through the skin can be significant in cancer: 
oils, vitamins, and minerals go into the skin easily, especially 
when they are applied in an oily medium.  
THE CERVICAL CANCER SCARE  
Many women with abnormal Pap smears, even with a 
biopsy showing the so -called "carcinoma in situ," have 
returned to normal in just two months with a diet including 
the following: 90 grams of protein, 500 mg. of magnesium as 
the chloride, 100,000 units of v itamin A, 400 units of vitamin 
E, 5 mg. of folic acid, 100 mg. of pantothenic acid, 100 mg. 
of B6, 100 mg. of niacinamide, and 500 mg. of vitamin C, 
with thyroid and progesterone as needed. Liver should be 
eaten twice a week. Some of the women apply vitami n A 
directly to the cervix.  
ASTHMA, MIGRAINE, PSORIASIS  
During LSD research, it was noticed that people with 
chronic headaches, asthma, or psoriasis sometimes 
recovered completely during treatment with frequent doses of 
LSD. Another alkaloid derived from e rgot, bromocri ptine, is 
now being used to suppress lactation (such as is caused by 
prolactin -secreting pituitary tumor which develops after using 
oral contraceptives) and is used experimentally to treat 
Parkinson's disease. Both LSD and bromocriptine shift the 
ratio of two brain chemicals, DOPA and serotonin, towards 
DOPA dominance. Among the effects of this is an inhibition 
of prolactin secretion. Prolactin excess is involved in breast 
cancer and in other cell proliferation, probably including the 
rapid cell division in psoriasis. Prolactin apparently inhibits 
progesterone production, and so could establish a self -
stimulating vicious circle. All of the effects of prolactin 
excess (including amenorrhea) which respond to an in crease 
of the DOPA/ seroto nin ratio can be obtained to some extent 
by other, more easily  available, materials. Vitamin B6 , 
thyroid, and progesterone all have this action. Nickel has  
62been found to have this effect in animals, but isn't available as 
a nutritional supple ment. Thyroid and progesterone have 
relieved asthma, migraine and psoriasis (or eczema) very 
effectively. Since tryptophan, an amino acid which is being 
promoted as a sedative, causes an increase of serotonin in 
the brain, it should not be used as a supple ment by people 
with any of these "low DOPA" symptoms. Milk is a rich 
natural source of tryptophan. Since tryptophan promotes 
formation of serotonin which stimulates release of prolactin,  
and prolactin activates the formation of sebum (oil) by the 
skin, lar ge amounts of milk could promote a tendency toward 
acne, when there is a deficiency of B6, thyroid, progester one, 
etc. 
Although the prolactin- secreting pituitary tumor was very 
rare a few years ago, it is now the most common form of 
pituitary tumor. In th e 1930's Korenchevsky demonstrated 
that estrogen produced that kind of tumor, among many 
others, and that the tumor would regress under the influence 
of progesterone. Since the liver requires adequate protein to 
eliminate estrogen, a low protein diet or ot her deficiencies 
would undoubtedly contribute to the development of this 
tumor in a user of birth control pills. Estrogen stimulates cell 
division in the prolactin -secreting part of the pituitary, and 
elevates the level of serotonin, and so can be the basi c 
chemical cause of these various symptoms. Diet, stress, and 
amount of light, of course, can modify the level of estrogen 
and its actions. The avoidance of anti -thyroid foods such as 
soy beans, cabbage, and peanuts would be especially 
important.  
V. PREGNANCY AND CHILDREN  
AGE AND PREGNANCY  
Women are often encouraged to have their children 
while they are young, by the fear of having a Mongoloid baby 
(Down's syndrome), which happens more often in older 
mothers. But someone did a study that showed th at Mon -
goloids are borne more often by women who have been 
married longer. Women who marry at 30 or 35, for example, 
were found to have fewer Mongoloid babies than women of 
the same age who had married younger. The investigator 
suggested that long -married couples so seldom made love 
that the chances were greater for the egg (or egg and sperm 
both) to deteriorate before being fertilized.  
Other studies show teenage mothers have babies with 
smaller brains than average, and with a greater chance of 
being slight ly retarded. (Smoking during pregnancy has the  
63same effect; carbon monoxide in city air would probably 
contribute to the damage.) If women are encouraged to 
have babies younger, will the population have smaller 
brains?  
Diabetic women are known to typically h ave large 
babies with big heads,  who learn quickly. With each 
pregnancy, a woman tends to have less "glucose 
tolerance," or to seem more diabetic. HCG, the hormone 
which helps sustain pregnancy, raises the blood sugar to 
meet the fetus's need for abundant sugar. So diabetes and 
pregnancy  have much in common. And as a woman gets 
older she tends towards diabetes, and so tends to nourish 
the fetus better, especially its brain. Besides this natural 
tendency, a more mature woman is less likely to live on 
snack foods.  
The results of these studi es indicate that later marriage 
would help to reduce the number of mentally retarded 
children. And better nutrition before and during pregnancy 
and nursing makes a great difference in the baby's mental 
and physical development. Young women who are 
pregnant  should be especially careful to avoid low blood 
sugar. Older women will probably require a little more 
vitamin E, and should be especially sure that they aren't 
getting a toxic amount of copper from their water supply or 
utensils. Regardless of age, pregn ant women should make 
a special effort to get perfect nutrition every day, and to 
avoid poisons,  including drugs, fumes and smoke. Even 
drugs which don't enter the fetus directly can affect its 
health by disturbing the mother's metabolism. Many drugs 
(and food additives) can increase a person's nutritional 
needs, for example by in creasing the rate at which vitamin 
C is lost in the urine.  
Recently there has been a great increase in sterility 
from endometriosis. Delayed reproduction is a suspected 
factor. A progesterone deficiency has been implicated. 
Thyroid, protein and vitamin A help to maintain 
progesterone production. Alcohol and other drugs used by 
the father can also cause birth defects.  
PRECOCIOUS BABIES  
Too much estrogen, insulin, unsaturated fats, or 
other things which tend to lower blood sugar (toxins 
including copper, stress, etc.) can lead to mentally 
retarded babies, premature and underweight babies, and 
small brained babies. Factors which help to maintain 
blood sugar, includ ing good diet and h ormones such as 
thyroxin and proges terone, help to produce big, healthy, 
large brained and precocious babies.  
During the last few months of pregnancy, there is often 
a craving for sweet things, which should be satisfied with 
fruit. The potassium in fruit has an effect like that of insulin,  
64so that sugar from the fruit can become available to cells 
without over -stimulating insulin secretion. Since insulin 
persists after disposing of excess sugar, it tends to keep 
blood sugar low and to int ensify craving for carbohydrates. 
Pantothenic acid helps to destroy insulin; this is one way it 
helps to maintain adequate blood sugar levels.  
During pregnancy the mother's body adapts to live 
increasingly on fat, so that most of the sugar which is 
availab le can be used by the baby. The brain uses most of 
the body's glucose, so mental fatigue can easily affect the 
blood sugar level. The developing baby is extremely 
dependent on glucose for its energy supply, and its brain can 
be damaged by sugar starvation.  
Women who are mildly diabetic are known to have big, 
precocious babies with large heads. Pregnancy itself re -
sembles diabetes, in the adaptation to oxidizing fat rather 
than sugar,  so that a slight tendency toward diabetes can be 
thought of as a support for pregnancy. Older women are 
more likely to have some degree of "diabetes," or elevated 
blood sugar. With each pregnancy, there is a tendency for 
the blood sugar to be higher, and for the baby to be bigger 
and more precocious. Older women, in fact, tend to have 
superior babies. However, after several pregnancies, 
especially if they are spaced so closely that the body 
doesn't have time to recover from the depletion of nutrients, 
the average birth weight suddenly falls, and problems of cell 
division such as twinning or Down's syndrome become much 
more common. The fact that the fourth or fifth baby is 
always borne by an "older" woman has led to the mistaken 
belief that age alone is resp onsible for "mongolism." The 
essential role of nutritional depletion is shown by comparing 
birth weights and birth defects in women of different social 
classes and incomes: at a given age, birth weights are lower 
and birth defects are more common, and the symptoms of 
depletion (loss of teeth, decreased birth weight, infertility) 
occur sooner in poor classes.  
Vitamin E, vitamin A, and magnesium are other nutrients 
that help to maintain blood sugar. Vitamin B12 is needed to 
use vitamin A. Folic acid, vitamin B6, and zinc are depleted 
by elevated estrogen and are especially important for healthy 
pregnancy. Too much copper can lower blood sugar; too 
much iron can destroy vitamin E, and vitamin E deficiency 
can lead to jaundice, which can affect the baby's brain.  
NUTRITION- RELATED IDEAS FOR MOTHERS  
If you are sick, reconsider everything you are doing as 
a contributing factor. There is an ideology ab out sickness 
being "eliminative ". This tends to produce some confusion,  
65about sickness being healthy.  
Give yourself time to get entirely well before getting 
pregnant. C. Brown -Sequard bred injured guinea pigs and 
found that the offspring had a high rate of epilepsy and birth 
defects. Sickness or trauma — including surgery — can 
bring on a chronic state of stress, which involves depletion of 
many nutrients. A few months of extra nutrition and 
avoidance of new stress can restore the body's reserves.  
Pregnancies should be spaced — 2 or 3 years is usually 
adequate — to allow the body to replenish itself with nu trients and 
new tissue.  
Studies have been done of the parents of very out -
standing people, and on the average the parents were 
several years older than the general average. Both social 
and biological factors are involved. Studies of the biological 
factors suggest that the optimum age range for the mother is 
between 27 and 37. In higher social classes, with better 
environmental support, the average baby is heavier, health -
ier, and more alert, and has a higher probability of surviving 
to adulthood; the optimu m age increases as income goes up. 
That is, in Guatemala the safest age for both mother and 
baby might be 19; in the U.S. ruling class, it might be 39.  
On the average, each baby up to the 4th or 5th is bigger 
and healthier, but then there is a sharp declin e in the 
average; it is at this point — which suggests that reserve 
nutrients have been depleted — that twinning and Down's 
syndrome become more likely. The mother's teeth also tend 
to fall out at that point. Calcium and vitamin B12 are 
centrally involved in the "apparatus" of cell division. Close 
spacing of pregnancies, poor nutrition, stress and toxins 
including alcohol and smoking are all known to increase the 
rate of birth defects.  
Anxiety, as in "schizophrenia," decreases uterine blood 
flow; it is know n that women who become pregnant while 
they are "schizophrenic" selectively abort the more fragile 
male embryos. The orgasmic pleasure state is not compati -
ble with anxiety, and would seem to guarantee a better blood 
(and thus nutrient) supply. Good sexual  attitudes probably 
optimize trans -placental nutrition.  
Alcoholic fathers seem to produce as many birth defects 
as do alcoholic mothers. There- are probably other more 
subtle nutritional effects acting through the father, but so far 
there isn't much clear information on this.  
The mother's brain and the mother's liver both seem to 
make specific contributions to the baby's nature. Both have 
profound effects on the ability to make sugar available for 
the development of an optimum baby. Estrogen is regulated -
centrally or crucially — by the liver. Estrogen, progesterone, 
iodine, sugar and stress are closely linked with each other,  
66and with brain development.  
Copper and iron can be toxic. Pregnancy and nursing 
increase all nutritional requirements, with the possible 
exception of vitamin D, copper and iron; it seems to act like 
vitamin D, improving calcium deposition. Calorie intake 
should increase slightly (e.g ., 200) in pregnancy, and con -
siderably in nursing (e.g., 1000). Zinc, folic acid, B12, and 
probably B6, and vitamin E ; requirements are increased 
more by pregnancy than by nursing, while protein, other B 
vitamins, calcium, iodine, and probably magnesium, vitamin 
A, and possibly fats, are needed in larger amounts for 
nursing.  
IRON SICKNESS 
Iron pills and tonics are a big American institution. 
Doctors often routinely prescribe iron on the same day they 
determine that a woman is pregnant. Iron pills are known  to 
frequently upset the stomach, but not many people suspect 
that "morning sickness" could be iron poisoning. The 
recommended daily allowance of iron for women is about 18 
milligrams, but I have seen advertisements in medical 
journals for pregnancy pills containing several times that 
dose, without any warning of possible dangers. It is known 
that excess iron accumulates in the liver, since there is no 
mechanism for excreting it. It has been noticed that infec -
tions, such as malaria, are higher in people wh o are getting 
an iron supplement. In tests in vitro, iron damages the 
capacity of antibodies to destroy germs. In the body, iron 
appears to be "hidden away" during infections, because of 
this effect on the immune system.  
Since iron dosage is so often incre ased during preg -
nancy, we should know the scientific background of exper -
iments on animals. All mammals that have been studied need 
vitamin E in order to get pregnant and to maintain the 
pregnancy. About 1940, laboratory animals being fed a 
commercially m anufactured diet started showing signs of 
vitamin E deficiency, dying of softening of the brain. The 
manufacturers knew they had added vitamin E to the mixture, 
but when they tested it they found that it contained none at 
all. It turned out that the iron s alts which were added to the 
food destroyed the vitamin E. The same process can happen 
in the intestine when iron pills are taken with a normal diet. 
Natural sources of iron, such as red meat, wheat bran, wheat 
germ, or molasses, don't seem to have this de structive effect 
on vitamin E, so if an iron supplement is needed during 
pregnancy these foods would seem likely to lower the risk of 
a vitamin E deficiency and of dangers such as a miscarriage.  
Iron pills are often used to treat anemia. There are  
67situations in which iron pills could make anemia worse, or 
even be the cause of it. In a vitamin E deficiency, red blood 
cells become fragile and break. This type of "hemolytic" 
anemia is fairly common in premature babies, and is now 
treated  with vitamin E. But anemia is too often treated in 
adults with the routine iron pills, without considering whether 
the anemia involves fragility of the red blood cells that might 
be made worse by iron pills that destroy vitamin E. Old 
people and cancer vi ctims are known to have abnormally 
fragile red blood cells. Since estrogen seems to oppose 
some of the functions of vitamin E, it would seem reasonable 
to consider the role of vitamin E in anemia, before giving a 
woman iron pills.  
Hypothyroidism is a commo n cause of anemia, possibly 
acting through the simple mechanism of lowering body 
temperature so much that blood production is retarded.  
FERTILITY  
Avoiding anti -thyroid foods, increasing use of eggs and 
milk; also, possibly liver with thyroid, progesterone 
(especially when miscarriage is threatened), magnesium, 
and vitamin E.  
BREASTFEEDING  
Several years ago in a biology course we were talking 
about immunology and I learned that proper American 
biologists "knew" that the mother's antibodies, though 
present in  milk, were all destroyed by the baby's digestive 
enzymes, and so couldn't possibly offer the baby any 
immunity against inf ections. However, I knew that Ro manian 
scientists, and other unacceptable types had demonstrated 
that milk antibodies do confer immun ity, and that various 
dietary proteins can enter the body undigested. About 1973, 
some Americans began discovering that human milk is good 
for human babies, and helps prevent diseases. It is not 
going to be so easy now to convince American women that 
the b est nutrition for their babies comes from a "formula," of 
cow's milk, sugar, and vegetable oil. But foreign babies are 
still being killed by American companies that dress their 
sales women in nurses' uniforms to convince poor women 
that their babies need t he scientific American "formula," 
even when there is no clean supply of water to mix it with. 
Since dietary proteins can get into the blood, early feeding 
of non -human milk would seem most likely to promote the 
development of allergies.  
Proper development of the face, including the shape of  
68the jaws and alignment of teeth, is promoted by normal 
nursing, and interfered with when the baby is fed from a 
bottle. Extensive studies (such as that done recently by J.W. 
Prescott) show that pleasurable skin stimulation is extremely 
important for proper ps ychological development: brutality, 
rape, religious activity and competition are high in societies 
which don't give physical affection to infants. Among other 
animals, even momentary separation following birth 
damages social behavior. Prescott criticizes b ottle feeding, 
and refers to Aristotle's belief that the state of mind is 
dependent on the state of the body: "the care of the body 
ought to precede that of the soul," and "Therefore, the 
highest good is some sort of pleasure..." (By 1979, human 
milk is st arting to be accepted as the correct food for babies. 
What is still resisted is allowing the mother and baby to 
remain in contact, with no separation following birth.)  
BRAIN DAMAGE AND THE PUBLIC HEALTH PROTECTORS  
Until the late 1950's, boric acid was stil l in general use 
as a " safe" antiseptic, and nursing mothers were advised to 
use if for "cleaning" and "disinfecting" their nipples, so their 
babies would be protected from germs. Then a columnist 
reported that some babies had died from getting too much 
boric acid with their milk, and that smaller doses could 
cause nerve and brain damage. This publicity discouraged 
some of the most dangerous uses of boric acid, but the last 
time I noticed the contents of Listerine mouthwash, boric 
acid was still included.  
In the early 1950s, hexachlorophene started being used 
by U.S. hospitals to wash newborn babies. Recently, exper -
imenters washed newborn monkeys in the same way, and 
found that it was being absorbed and was causing gross 
brain damage. For twenty years, Amer icans had kept them -
selves and their children clean -smelling with phisohex and 
lifebuoy soap, in the belief that hexachlorophene was 
harmless. How much dyslexia, hyperactivity, and "minimal 
brain dysfunction- has resulted from such chemical pseudo -
cleanlin ess? Brain damaged animals are known to become 
aggressive; could poisoning be a cause of human 
aggressiveness ? 
A few years ago J.W.Olney of Washington University 
School of Medicine found that large doses of monosodium  
glutamate cause brain damage in baby mice, but that the  
effects aren't obvious until they start to grow up. A typical 
effect of this kind of brain damage is that the females lose  
interest in sex and become obese. Since young animals are 
most susceptible to injury, he criticized the manufacturers 
who added it to baby foods to make the taste appealing to the  
69mothers  who had become accustomed to the taste of MSG 
or Accent. As a result of the public concern about 
monosodium glutamate, the baby food companies 
announced they were no longer adding the substance; 
instead they quietly substi tuted another amino acid with a 
similar flavor. Olney has demonstrated that other amino 
acids, such as aspartic acid, can be just as poisonous as 
glutamate. The FDA takes the line that he hasn 't proved 
MSG to be toxic to human babies.  
Now the FDA has given its appro val to a new 
chemical sweetener, aspartame, which is a molecule 
containing aspartic acid. An FDA scientist said, "We do 
not deny that certain doses of aspartic acid produce brain 
lesions...' but "Everything has its toxi city: under abnormal 
conditions,  water can be toxic." Stanl ey Glassner, a 
consumer -safety officer" in the FDA, expresses his 
concern in these words: "..on the practical side, I wouldn't 
say everybody should substitute it in their diets." "Sugar 
has been around for years, and nobody is d ying from it. 
Any new substa nce, despite all the safety tests, is 
surrounded by question marks." Of course, there are 
many studies that contradict his claim that nobody is 
dying from sugar, but the most interest ing thing is how 
these men argue, as if sugar or water had anything to d o 
with the subject — we don't want the FDA to regulate 
sugar and water, so we shouldn't ask them to regulate a 
fine new product for which consumers will pay a "premium 
price." The FDA calculated the allowable amount of 
aspartame on the basis of adult body weight: the 
allowable amount would have to be smaller if a child's 
body weight were used as the basis. But the foods that 
can contain it under the FDA guidelines are foods that 
children normally eat: sweet breakfast cereals, chewing 
gum, puddings and gelat ine, toppings, and dry bases for 
drinks, as well as in powder or tablet form. In the form of 
a "table substitute for sugar," it seems that it would be 
easy for a child to get a toxic dose.  
Since Olney has shown that glutamate and aspartame 
have an additive  effect ("half a dose of each equals a full 
dose of one alone"), children who ate food containing MSG 
would have a significant chance of going beyond the so -
called "safety margin" for aspartame. The FDA chooses to 
ignore Olney's clear evidence that these t wo amino acids 
have an additive toxicity. Beyond this known menace 
(though no one knows whether humans are more sensitive 
or less sensitive than mice to these poisons) there is the 
possibility of their toxic interaction with other food 
additives . Food additives are not the "traces of chemicals" 
many people suppose: for example, nearly half of the 
calcium contained in commercial bread may come from the 
dough  conditioner and mold inhibitor, with the  rest being  
70provided by the milk and wheat. And there are always 
impurities in the additives, resulting from the industrial 
processes of their manufacture, but the FDA normally likes to 
ignore these. When evidence was presented showing that 
saccharine can cause cancer, the FDA  suddenly remembered 
the impurities in food additives, and now asked for proof that 
it was "the saccharine itself" that caused cancer, and not an 
impurity in it. Of course the consumer eats the impurities with 
the saccharine (and with all other additives),  and probably 
wouldn't care very much whether it was the sweetener itself 
or the arsenic, mercury and lead in it which caused his 
cancer. Periodically, women's hair is found to be loaded with 
arsenic, and the soap companies are told to spend a little 
more money to remove some of this contaminant, but the 
pressure of profits always seems to lead them back to the 
high levels of impurities.  
Infant brain damage can be caused by a deficiency of 
the B vitamin, folic acid. Taking estrogen, as in birth control 
pills, tends to deplete the body's supply of folic acid, so that 
if a pregnancy occurs right after stopping the pills it is more 
likely to lead to a miscarriage or deformity from folic acid 
deficiency. This vitamin, and probably other nutrients such 
as zinc an d vitamin E, should always be packaged with birth 
control pills or other forms of estrogen, or at least should be 
recommended by the doctor who prescribes them. Animal 
experiments show that giving estrogen to the mother causes 
brain damage in the fetus. Th is could result from a folic acid 
deficiency, or from various other effects of estrogen, such as 
low blood sugar or high copper.  
HYPERACTIVITY 
The various tissues of the body can function acceptably 
at different levels of nutrition. For example, the skin, with its 
low energy requirements, seems to remain alive for several 
hours after the death of the body in general. The brain, with 
its extremely high energy requirements, is usually the first to 
suffer from energy deprivation. At slight levels of deprivatio n, 
the brain will simply lose functional efficiency, but more 
serious or prolonged deprivation can produce lingering 
modification, or even structural damage which is relatively 
permanent (and may even have transgenerational effects.')  
Just as the skin (or muscle) has a lower energy requir -
ement than the brain, the various parts of the brain have 
different requirements. The parts which are most resistant 
to damage are the "lowest" (or "most skin -like") and "oldest" 
parts of the brain, the parts we have in co mmon with frogs. 
These parts regulate physiological processes, such as 
breathing, and so it is biologically useful that they should be  
71 
most resistant to damage. When a person is given an 
anesthetic, the first parts to stop functioning, or to go to 
sleep, seem to be just those parts that have the highest 
energy requirements, and which are least resistant to 
damage. The anesthetized person keeps breathing, for example, until very high doses of anesthetic are given, but 
other functions disappear one by one as the dose increases.  
The front part of the brain, which is most uniquely human 
(and "newest") but which doesn't have "specific" function, in  
the usual sense, is one of the most sensitive parts of the brain. It is a very large piece of tissue, and it seems to be involved in planning and choosing, in governing the other 
more specific functions. (This part of the brain, as well as the 
cerebal cortex in general, gives us the ability to "disregard" stimuli, to use Lendon Smith's term.)  
The famous Russian neuro- psychologist, A.R. Luria, has 
described the behavior of dogs when this tissue is damaged or removed:  
...destruction of the frontal lobes leads, not so much 
to a disturbance of memory as to a disturbance of the 
ability to inhibit orienting reflexes to distracting 
stimuli...such an animal cannot per form tasks 
involving delayed responses under ordinary 
conditions, but can do so provided that irrelevant, 
distracting stimuli are removed (if the animal is kept 
in total darkness, if tranquilizers are administered, 
and so on).  
The role of the prefrontal cortex in the synthesis 
of systems of stimuli and the creation of a plan of action is manifested not only in relation to currently 
acting stimuli, but also in the formation of active 
behavior directed towards the future.
2 
Various theories of what causes hyperactivity, e.g., low 
blood sugar, weak radiation from fluorescent lights and TV3 or 
food additives4 and the observation that drugs which stimulate 
the sympathetic or adrenergic nerves (ephedrine or caffeine, e.g.) wilt relieve the symptoms, all are consistent with the idea 
that not enough energy is being supplied to permit this tissue 
to function properly. Low blood sugar will starve the nerves; 
food additives (which are usually associated with low quality 
foods with a high sugar content, so this theory isn't nearly so 
plausible as the idea that eating sugar is the main cause of low blood sugar and the associated hyperactivity) or any low 
level poison can serve as a stressor of nerve tissue, leading 
to increased energy requirements; many forms of very weak radiation
5 can lower the efficiency of metabolism, increasing 
its energy requirement, and brain tissue is the most sensitive tissue to at least som e kinds of radiation.  
72 
Children who are given amphetamines to keep them 
quiet in school don't grow as fast as they should, and remain 
permanently stunted even after stopping the treatment. This 
kind of drug can be addicting, resulting in decreased 
alertness when the drug is stopped. Hormonal compensation 
is likely to be involved, so it would seem reasonable to 
check at least the thyroid function in children who have been 
subje cted to amphetamine treatment; it might help them 
catch up in mental and physical growth.  
A recent study showed a clear association between 
small physical defects and hyperactivity implicating "gesta -
tional stress," e.g., hormone imbalance and malnutrition , in 
producing hyperactivity. These could result in either 
damage to the child's brain or its hormone regulation, e.g., 
low thyroid and high estrogen. Damaged girls tend to be too 
passive while boys are too active.  
1. Needham, A.E., The Growth Process in Anim als, Van 
Nostrand, Princeton, N.J., 1964.  
2. Luria, A.R., The Working Brain, Basic Books, N.Y., 1973.  
3. Ott, J., Health and Light, Devin -Adaire, Old Greenwich, 
Conn., 1973.  
4. Feingold, B., Why your Child is Hyperactive, Random 
House, N.Y., 1975.  
5. Frey, A.H., &  S.R. Feld, " Avoidance by rats of 
illumination with low power nonionizing 
electromagnetic energy", J. Compar. & Physiological 
Psychology 89 (2) 183- 188, 1975. 
FLUORIDE  
Water that is naturally "fluoridated" tends to be "hard," that 
is, rich in calcium and magnesium. A few studies have 
compared dental health in areas that have hard or soft water, 
and have found that dental health varied with hardness of 
water, independentl y of fluoride content (Rothman, et al, J. 
Pub. Health Dent. 32, 225, 1975; T. Ockerse, S. African Med. 
J. 18, 225, 1944).  
Human and animal experiments have shown that good 
general nutrition, including adequate protein and vitamin C 
and a high ratio of calc ium and magnesium to phosphate, 
can improve dental health.  
Several years ago a study was done to compare blood 
enzymes in a town before and after fluoridation of the water 
supply. Changes did occur, showing that the chemical had altered 
cellular metabolism.  
Industrial pollution is tending to raise the fluoride 
content of soil and water. Foods on the average, in a study
73done several years ago, contained about ten times as much 
fluoride as is considered desirable in the water supply.  
Because of the wide distribution of foods, people in low -
fluoride areas will still get considerable amounts of it in their 
food. Burk and Yamouyannis showed an association 
between fluoridation and cancer, but there seems to have 
been no discussion of this  in the scientific community, other 
than some distorted comments by the fluoridation  establish -
ments.  
I think it would be more rational to help people under -
stand the role of nutrition in health, including dental health, 
than to divert their attention from  the real issue (our 
national food supply) by conducting hysterical campaigns to 
fluor idate the public water supplies.  
 
"Expect poison from the standing water "  
  "Those that put their Bodies To endure are Fools.''  
William Blake  
VI. DIETS  
APPETITE  
Low blood sugar usually causes an intense craving for 
something sweet. It is known that a vitamin A deficiency 
causes increased hunger — I suspect this acts through the 
mechanism of blood sugar. A deficiency of vitamin B1 
causes loss of appetite. Normally, app etite is probably a 
good indicator of specific needs for protein, fat, carbohy -
drate, vitamin C, salts, and possibly other nutrients. As our 
tastes evolved, they had to be satisfied by whole foods, so a 
craving for carbohydrate wouldn't disrupt our physiol ogy if 
we didn't have such easy access to highly purified (or 
distorted) carbohydrates . 
A craving for "salt" is normally satisfied with sodium 
chloride (in bacon, cheese, crackers, olives, etc.), which 
doesn't meet the body's needs. Taking sodium as an 
additive suppresses the hormone which enables the body 
to retain sodium, and so it is physiol ogically addictive. In 
addition,  the precursor hormone may accumulate, and this 
hormone produces inflammation (in joints, especially, as 
shown by the work of Hans Sel ye and his associates). If 
we could satisfy the salt craving with a balanced salt, 
including potassium and magnesium and calcium, we 
would probably be more comfortable and would avoid the 
salt (sodium) addiction. Low thyroid can cause loss of 
appetite. Thi n people, even  
74very active people , can still be deficient in thyroid.  
FASTING  
The thymus gland, essential for immunity, shrinks 
during fasting. Chronic infections such as tuberculosis are 
more common in malnourished people. However, fasting 
has been used successfully in treating certain diseases. It 
can be useful in diagnosing food allergies, as in some 
types of schizophrenia. Its use as a weight reducing 
technique is probably not generally justified by the facts. A 
current study (197 5) is investigating the possibility that a 
balanced salt solution will prevent the destruction of 
muscle and other protein -rich tissues during fasting. I have 
noticed that such a solution relieves feelings of stress, so I 
think it will prove to prevent pro tein-wastage. 
In a study of the nature of weight loss in a two week 
fast, it was found that about 95% of the lost weight was 
from protein rich tissues (muscles and glands), rather than 
fat. A low calorie diet produces a slower weight loss, but in 
this case  most of the lost weight is fat. Since fat has a 
very low rate of metabolism, people who lose muscle by 
fasting are going to have increasing difficulty in losing 
weight, since they will have less active tissue to consume 
fat. Building up muscle and lymph t issue for optimum 
health — even if it initially causes a slight weight gain — 
will make reducing easier by increasing the mass of 
metabolically active tissue. Progesterone is the only 
steroid hormone I know of which will cause the thymus to 
regenerate. Vit amin A spares protein, and will protect 
these tissues even on a fairly low protein diet (Vits & 
Hormones, 1977).  
Chronic dieters can adapt to a low calorie intake (Lan-
cet, April 5, 1975, Miller and Parsonage). This is probably 
partly from a loss of active  "protein tissue." Total nutrition 
is needed for replacing such tissues.  
Fasting and stress suppress the thyroid, and thus can 
aggravate many symptoms. Thyroid function isn't always 
restored when the fast ends.  
COFFEE, TEA, AND COLAS  
Coffee, cocoa, and col a are flavorings made from 
seeds, and tea of course is an extract made from certain 
leaves. This means that they must contain nutrients as 
well as drugs. This fact — that an extract made from plant 
or animal tissue contains nutrients — is very commonly 
overlooked. Even the companies that sell the products 
incorrectly describe them as containing no nutrients, 
except the other materials they  
75add to the flavoring. For example, Coca -Cola claims that 
phosphoric  acid and sugar are the only nutrients in their 
product, yet a standard text book indicates that Coke is rich 
in potassium (while Pepsi has more sodium than potassium). 
In a study of the thiamine content of dark roast coffee, it was 
found that one or two c ups provide the minimum daily 
requirement of vitamin B1. Leaves contain magnesium, 
potassium, vitamins A, K, E and Q10 (ubiquinone), as well as 
other trace minerals and the B vitamins, so all kinds of tea 
must contain moderate amounts of these nutrients. A bout 
20% of dietary niacin and manganese can be provided by 
coffee. In Russia, green tea is often prescribed for its vitamin 
P or rutin content. Seeds and leaves often contain chemicals 
which bind materials such as magnesium, zinc, and calcium, 
but these w ill break down and release the minerals under 
various conditions — the fermenting process in tea man -
ufacture, for example, should have this effect.  
Some nutritionists have noticed that caffeine is said to 
raise insulin levels in the blood, and from this h ave reasoned 
that, since insulin promotes the conversion of glucose to fat, 
caffeine must be avoided in a reducing diet. Caffeine has a 
reputation for raising blood pressure, but the evidence is not 
clear on this point: it seems to be an individual matter 
whether it will raise or lower blood pressure. Caffeine, in fact, 
is prescribed in doses equivalent to 2 to 4 cups of coffee  (200 
to 400 mg.) to relieve hypertensive headaches (J.P. Merrill, in 
Principles of Internal Medicine, Harrison, 2nd edition, p. 
1425). Coffee improves circulation to the brain; Benjamin 
Franklin and Goethe are said to have used 30 to 65 cups 
daily. This amount would be close to the maximum safe daily 
dosage of caffeine, 6 grams (Bennett and Bondy, Principles of 
Internal Medicine, p. 795). Very small doses of caffeine have 
a "paradoxical" sedative effect, but this is a familiar effect of 
anything which raises the brain's energy level.  
Caffeine (which doesn't necessarily have the same 
physiological effect as coffee) stimulates the sympat hetic 
nervous system and raises the cellular level of cyclic AMP. 
Both of these effects promote lipolysis, the removal of fat 
from storage for use. This may account for the fact that 
coffee has been found to lower serum cholesterol and 
triglycerides, while  raising the level of free fatty acids. 
Increased lipolysis would seem to be desirable in connection 
with a reducing diet. (Incidentally, estrogen lowers the level 
of cyclic AMP in most tissues.) Since both caffeine and 
adrenalin raise the metabolic rate, fat is presumably being 
consumed more rapidly. Adrenalin is known to raise blood 
sugar, apparently by inhibiting the utilization of glucose and 
increasing the utilization of fat. Coffee normally raises blood 
sugar, by its adrenalin -like effect. In this cas e, the level of  
76insulin doesn't seem to be the primary factor regulating 
carbohydrate metabolism. However, during fasting, coffee 
and/ or adrenalin might speed the depletion of the glycogen 
reserves and thus speed the appearance of hypoglycem ia. 
Many of these studies seem to indicate that coffee would be 
a valuable part of a reducing diet, but since the results are 
so contrary to "common knowledge," there will have to be 
more experimental work done. Other factors, such as the 
habit of sweeteni ng coffee, also have to be considered. An 
interest ing study in the USSR suggests how complex these 
exper iments can get: animals were fed either boiled water or 
unboiled water, and it was found that the animals receiving 
boiled water had significantly hig her serum cholesterol 
levels than the animals drinking unboiled water.  
Caffeine, acting through nerves as well as directly, can 
increase immunity. Injected into an animal's brain, it was 
found to slow the growth of cancer. It was recently dis -
covered accidentally that a very small amount of caffeine 
mixed with the tars from cigarette smoke prevented that 
material from causing cancers. It was also found, in an 
experiment with cultured cells, that caffeine prevents the 
multiplication of a cancer causing virus. Caffeine stimulates 
the thyroid, and hypothyroidism can cause extreme suscep -
tibility to infection. Epidemiological studies show that heavy 
coffee drinkers have no more heart disease (or other sick -
ness) than non -drinkers. However black women seemed  to 
be protected against heart attacks if they drank coffee.  
Still, coffee makes many people anxious and can 
produce a stress -like reaction. Whether to use it or not is 
largely an individual matter.  
NATURAL VITAMINS AND MINERALS — ANY DIFFERENCE?  
Most biological molecules are produced in only one of 
two "mirror image" forms. Even natural (e.g., "right -handed" 
or "left -handed") chemicals can be degraded by harsh 
industrial processes into a more random mixture. The 
structural randomization is called race mizing. An interesting 
theory of aging is that racemic molecules accumulate with 
time; these molecules are known to have different physical 
and biological properties. Synthetic vitamin E may be cheap 
and easy to standardize, but the randomness may also be 
responsible for the slight toxicity of high dosages of vitamin 
E reported by a few doctors.  
The idea that "an element" such as potassium is simply 
that element, without further qualification, is a strange idea 
to be proposed by anyone who supposedly has ha d a 
chemistry course, but that is what the American Dietetic  
77Association says. Elements come in different isotopes; the 
proportion of heavy and light isotopes of, for example, 
potassium, varies in the human body with age, and is 
measurably di fferent from normal in cancer cells. "Natural" 
minerals are usually bound by special molecules, such as 
proteins or " pigments" (e.g., heme) and in this state do not 
seem to destroy vitamins, as do various water -soluble 
"inorganic" minerals. Chelation does not necessarily im prove 
assimilation of a mineral — in fact it often prevents 
absorption of a nutrient, as in the case of phytic acid.  
The A.D.A. officials who propagate nutritional misinfor -
mation may be honestly ignorant, or they may think it is in 
the public interest to lie. Either way, it is quite wrong for 
them to so aggressively attack the "nutritional quacks" when 
their own information is so dubious . 
ADDITIVES AND QUALITY  
An American Dietetic Association "Position Paper" on 
food and nutrition misinformation says "Judicious use of food 
additives helps insure high quality processed food." That may 
in some warped way be true, but it has nothing to do with the 
reality of food m anufacturing. A reference book on additives 
for the food industry points out that you shouldn't always buy 
the lowest quality cheap food materials, and then attempt to 
give them the appearance and flavor of higher grade food by 
the manipulation of chemical  additives, because sometimes 
the necessary additives are so expen sive that it might 
occasionally be more profitable to buy a better grade of food 
material in the first place. This agency, when talking to the 
food industry, is perfectly frank in acknowled ging that 
additives are used for the purpose of foisting inferior grades 
of food upon the gullible consumer. Why is the A.D.A. so 
intent on denying the facts? (If an apologist for the A.D.A. 
reads this: consider it a challenge to a public debate on the 
subject of your choice.)  
A study was done about 30 years ago to see whether 
supplements given to "exceedingly well -nourished" tuber -
culosis patients would make a difference in their recovery. 
The supplement consisted of 600 milligrams of vitamin C, 
75.000 to 150,000 units of vitamin A, 5000 units of vitamin D, 
about 4 grams of brewer's yeast, and six grams of dried liver. 
The control . group received placebos, in "double blind" 
fashion. There was a distinct improvement in the group which 
got the supplement (see  Williams' Nutrition Against Disease, 
p. 223). So many similar studies have been done it is simply 
unscientific to say that supplements aren't necessary when 
'well balanced" meals are eaten. At a symposium for 
pharmacists, the "professional dietitians" wer e arguing that  
78druggists should not sell any nutritional supplements with out 
a prescription. A woman in the audience pointed out that 
most Americans don't take the time to prepare three "well 
balanced" meals every day, and that they just won't be well -
nourished if they don't take some kind of supplement. The 
dietitian snickered "I am defeated," but went on with her plea 
that the druggists stop selling supplements, with the strong 
implication that she couldn't argue with such irra tional 
opponents.  
Individual peculiarities and stress can make it extremely 
difficult to stay healthy on a normal diet; however, if meals of 
liver, broccoli leaves and oysters and papaya can be con -
sidered normal, then supplements might generally be un -
necessary.  
If a person develops symptoms of hay fever, a chronic 
cold, asthma, diarrhea, hemorrhoids, headaches, numb 
fingers, dizziness, etc., it is possible that they are allergic to 
some of the trash which is used in the manufacture of the 
pills; powdered vitamin s and minerals might be tried in that 
case, since they are more likely to be "pure" — but even 
these powders can contain allergens. See "Warning About 
Supplements." Low blood sugar, as shown by H. Laborit, will 
induce allergic reactions even when there was  no sensitivity 
at a higher level of blood sugar. Since low thyroid is an 
important cause of low blood sugar, thyroid function should 
be checked (by BMR or achilles tendon reflex, even by body 
temperature, but not by blood tests) when there are signs of 
allergy.  
WARNING ABOUT SUPPLEMENTS  
As we age, we accumulate more and more of the heavy 
metals in our tissues. Lead replaces calcium, and it reaches 
concentrations in the bones many times higher than in the 
soft tissues. A bone meal supplement produced at a g lue 
factory (where the animals were probably old) was found to 
contain 190 parts lead per million. The FDA has set a limit of 
11/2 part per million for evaporated milk, but they refused to 
act in the bone meal case in 1970 because they said food 
supplement s were in a "gray area" between food and drugs; 
they now say they recognize health foods as food. More 
recently, a survey of dog food found over 5 ppm lead, again 
probably because of the age of the animals used. Fluoride 
also accumulates with age in bones.  The lead in our bones is 
less harmful than the same amount in our soft tissues. but 
certain materials (chelators, including penicillamine and 
EDTA; bottled salad dressing often contains EDTA) are able 
to remove lead from bones and move it to the brain, wh ere it  
79is more destructive.  
Another supplement that is likely to be dangerous is 
"lecithin," in the form usually sold. Lecithin itself is white. 
When exposed to oxygen the unsaturated fatty acids oxidize, 
causing it to become yellow and then brown. Rancid oils are 
dangerous — see pages 83 -84. Eggs are a good way to get 
fresh lecithin. Use of a choline supplement will stimulate 
lecithin sythesis in the body when the essential fatty acids 
are present. Whole foods (leaves, seeds, etc.) are less likely 
to have deteriorated from exposure t o oxygen than are man-
ufactured foods.  
It is hard to separate cadmium from zinc,  and cadmium 
is toxic, so zinc supplements should be used carefully 
Biological purification (as in oysters) is usually more 
effective than indu strial refining.  
The FDA has allowed some very strange uses of the 
word "natural" — in their sense, industrial pr ocesses are 
natural. Vitamins E,  A, and sometimes D are available as 
natural, biological substances, but other vitamins are not. 
Tablets often contain paraffin and talc (which contains 
asbestos fibers) as the supposedly "inert" binders.  
VITAMIN C: MANY EFFECTS  
One of the oldest known functions of vitamin C is its role 
(hydroxylation) in the synthesis of collagen for connective 
tissue. At high concentrations, it can also depolymerize 
(make more soluble) the collagen, reversing one of the 
important features of the  aging process. A recent study (J. 
Clin. Nutr.  summer, 1974 ) shows that even inside the cells of 
membranes structural integrity is improved (electron 
microscopic evidence in guinea pigs) by very high doses. 
including the large doses suggested by Linus Paul ing. Since 
infections have to enter through membranes, structural 
integrity would seem likely to improve resistance. Tyrosine 
metabolism, which is involved in brain function, is sensitive to 
vitamin C; also. vitamin C maintains tissue adrenaline levels, 
possibly by inhibiting its oxidation, and adrenaline is 
necessary for the chalones to exert their function of inhibit ing 
cell division. (Pauling proposed a role for vitamin C in 
controlling cell division in cancer, but the mechanism he 
chose probably wasn't  the correct one; there may be a 
variety of mechanisms. including for example the free radical 
processes suggested by W.F. Koch and A. Szent -Gyorgyi.) 
Hans Selye has demonstrated that vitamin C can prevent 
heavy metal (e.g., mercury) toxicity; it reduces t he metal to a 
less toxic form, and also helps solub ilize and remove it. 
White blood cells have an extremely high affinity for vitamin 
C, and can't function properly without an adequate amount:  
80Because  of this great affinity, an excess of whit e cells, 
as in leukemia, apparently robs other tissues of vitamin C 
and produces hemorrhages and bruises.  
Some people oppose the idea that nutrition can prevent or 
cure diseases. Many strange warnings about vitamin C have 
appeared in the newspapers.  
INTERACTIONS  
Since all nutrients work together, it's generally best to 
eat a variety of foods at each meal. Unrefined foods assure 
a fairly broad range of nutrients. People sometimes forget 
that meat is a "refined" food in this sense: it doesn't contain 
all the nutrients needed to make an animal. Nearly all 
Americans have porous, weakened bones and teeth by the 
time they are 50, because of the large amount of meat eaten 
in relation to other foods. When excess phosphate (from 
meat or wheat germ, for example)  is eaten, calcium and 
magnesium are removed from the teeth and bones to be 
excreted with the phosphate. Using a large amount of milk 
improves the ratio of calcium to phosphorus, but doesn't 
supply enough magne sium to prevent tooth decay, heart 
trouble, a nd cramps. Greens and vegetables should be 
eaten with the animal proteins.  
Eating extra amounts of liquid oil will increase your 
need for vitamin E, and extra carbohydrate will make you 
need more vitamin B1. Excess protein increases the 
amount of B6 needed . Some kinds of protein (cysteine rich, 
such as muscle and liver) also inhibit the thyroid; 
carbohydrate can promote the formation of T3, the most 
active form of thyroid hormone.  
Other types of interaction haven't been very well 
studied, but they probably are the reason for some peculiar 
diet systems: allergies to one food can cause digestive 
problems that interfere with other foods. For example, 
people who are allergic to onions sometimes have a gall 
bladder reaction which prevents proper digestion of fats . If 
we added up all of the special "avoidance" diets, no one 
could eat anything. Many people are ruining their health by 
avoiding too many foods.  
CEREALS, SEEDS, AND BEANS  
A seed is a kind of storage device, usually containing 
enough material to produce a  sprout and root several times 
bigger than the seed, just by adding water. Health food 
"fanatics" for many years have advocated the use of 
sprouted grains and beans, and used to be ridiculed by the  
81scientific home -economist types who "knew" t hat a seed 
contained all the nutrients that would be in the sprout. Home 
economists did approve of soaking beans overnight, but only 
because it was supposed to reduce cooking time. E. Pfeiffer 
used to demonstrate chromatographically how very different 
spro uts were from seeds in chemical composition, but it is just 
in the last few months that establishment (Colorado State 
University) food chemists have reported that sprouts contain 
twice as much protein as do the legumes from which they 
grow.  
Glutin, the main protein of gluten, is a typical storage 
protein. Instead of the normal ratio of nitrogen to carbon, 
oxygen and hydrogen, glutin is extra heavily loaded with 
nitrogen, in the form of amide and amine groups on the side 
chains. When seeds are  soaked or sprouted, these 
nitrogens combine with carbohydrates to form a large 
amount of new protein, consuming in the process some of 
the stored starch. If we eat seeds in the crude form, our 
digestive enzymes handle the glutin differently, producing 
some fairly toxic peptides (chemically related to histamine) 
and some ammonia; these, added to the starch, can cause 
gas and a variety of allergic reactions. Phosphate is also 
released from its storage form as phytic acid by sprouting. 
This reaction also prod uces inositol, to which the phosphate 
is bound. If seeds, especially legumes, are eaten without 
soaking, phytic acid chelates minerals such as zinc and 
prevents their absorption. The traditional practice of letting 
bread rise overnight allowed these same e nzymic reactions 
to occur. The hasty baker is not only robbing the population 
of half of its cereal protein, but is also making a slightly 
toxic product. (Thyroid inhibitors — iodate and bromate —  
are added to most bakery breads.)  
VINEGAR, HONEY, AND FAT  
I have seen people very quickly get fat on a daily drink 
of cider vinegar and honey and a dose of lecithin. The folk 
medicine tradition behind it was probably valid — it was a 
good way to fatten up people who were under -weight. But 
somehow this got twisted into promoting it as a "reducing 
formula." Lecithin is a good nutrient and seems to lower the 
danger of a high cholesterol level in the blood. And cider 
vinegar and honey are both rich in necessary minerals. But 
the acetic acid in vinegar not only is a com ponent of fat 
molecules, but it also serves to activate the process of 
converting glucose into fat (Adv. Lipid Res. 9, p. 111. 1971). 
Thus the formula is good as part of a weight -gaining diet, but 
not as part of a reducing program.  
82MARGARINE OR BUTTER  
Animal studies show that margarine causes more 
circulatory disease than does butter or cholesterol. 
Margarine  is produced from oils (which may be rancid) by 
the use of a nickel catalyst; a trace of nickel remaining in 
the oil could be harmful, b ut it is probably the synthetic 
form of fat itself which is toxic. This is another case where 
a synthetic chemical is entirely different, biologically and 
chemically, from the natural chemicals. Hardening at best 
would cause the oil to become like animal f ats 
(hydrogenated), but reality is worse than theory, and 
hardened oil is worse than animal grease. But ter has other 
valuable componen ts, including vitamin A, while margarine 
often is colored with very dubious dyes — nutritious 
carotene used to be used, bu t now synthetic mineral dyes 
are usually more "economical." (I don't know whether this 
is still true — Aug. 21, 1979.)  
LIQUID OILS  
E. Racker  and other biochemists have pointed out 
that the unsaturated (liquid) fatty acids are able to 
uncouple the energy producing reactions from oxidation. 
This means that they will promote consumption of fuel 
without increasing fat synthesis. This is an effect similar to 
the "specific dynamic action" of proteins, and it is the 
biochemical explanation for the fact that all calories don't 
count the same as far as weight reduction goes. But this 
also means that all useful energy production is reduced in 
relation to  heat production. 
The unsaturated oils also can stimulate a dangerous 
kind of oxidation, in which they break down in ways that 
seem to accelerate the aging process. One of the more 
conservative investigators of vitamin E recently (in A.J. 
Clin. Nutr., 1974 ) revised his opinion regarding the 
required amount of vitamin E: he wrote that the 
requirement of 15 mg./day will be increased to about 50 
mg./day if the person eats much unsaturated oil (fish, 
seeds, etc.). People who study the amount of vitamin E 
needed  for reproduction, and those who study its effect on 
the durability of red blood cells usually come up with very 
different figures for an optimum intake. The age of the 
animal or person studied is crucial: in the first year of life, 
the minimum dose for fe rtility in rats increases by 67 
times. The only study of vitamin E needs in human 
menopause that I know of suggest that 500 mg./day is 
needed. Extrapolation of the rat results to humans would 
suggest a little bit more than that.  
A study comparing Dutch bab ies with English babies 
found that the amount of unsaturated fat in the body was 
about 40 times higher in th e Dutch babies who were fed  
83very little animal fat. The vitamin E requirement increases 
as the amount of unsaturated fat in the ti ssue increases.  
In a big study to test the idea that liquid oil would help 
prevent heart disease through its effect of lowering blood 
cholesterol levels, the raw figures showed slightly more 
heart disease among the liquid fat eaters, though the 
difference wasn't statistically significant. There was, 
however, a sig nificantly greater rate of death from cancer 
among the liquid fat eaters. An animal study done about 
1940  suggested that this would happen: animals fed large 
amounts of cod liver oil nearly all di ed of cancer, but when 
they were fed the same amount of oil with a large vitamin E 
supplement, the ir cancer rate was normal. It's startling to 
realize  that the whole group conducting the experiment 
failed to anticipate this result, through ignorance of the 
literature on animal studies of liquid oil feeding.  
Some articles in medical magazines have claimed 
recently that an effect of diet on heart disease has been 
demonstrated, but they neglect to point out that the dieters 
also stopped smoking — and the known effects of smoking 
would account for the differences in heart disease.  
Since unsaturated fats poison energy production, they 
could even contribute to  heart disease. They inhibit thyroid 
function, and hypothyroidism is associated strongly with 
heart disease. In a recent study, people who ate large 
amounts of unsaturated oils were judged to be older in 
appearance than people who ate less.  
Recent studies are showing that animal fats (saturated) 
are essential for proper brain development, and that unsa -
turated fats (as in typical "formulas") can damage brain 
development.  
LAXATIVES  
The daily use of a few spoonfuls of bran in the breakfast 
cereal, or of a car rot as a snack (or grated, as a salad), can 
prevent practically all constipation. A high fiber diet also 
lowers the risk of bowel cancer, and is being used increas -
ingly for preventing and treating conditions such as colitis 
and diverticulitis. It turns ou t that the popular old "bland diet" 
without fiber was just about the worst possible thing for 
colitis. An extra benefit of carrot fiber, besides the bulk and 
moisture -holding properties, is that it captures and holds fat 
molecules, removing them from the b ody and making weight 
loss easier. The small amount of sugar in carrots is released 
slowly, so that it doesn't disturb blood sugar as much as 
would the same amount in a different form.  
It is now known that even "purified" mineral oil contains 
small amounts  of cancer causing chemicals. Mineral oil isn't  
84just a benign lubricant, it is an irritant. Years ago, autopsies of 
chronic users of mineral oil found that the oil had entered fat 
tissues, where it stayed because it can't be metabolized. 
When "authorities" say that mineral oi l can't be absorbed by 
the body,  I wonder what kind of a mechanism they have in 
mind that would keep it out while other oils are being 
massively absorbed.  
If a person really needs  a laxative, one with fewer 
dangers would be preferable — maybe Epsom  salts or aloe 
vera. Chronic consti pation is a very common sign of hypo -
thyroidism. Premenstrual constipation, gas and diarrhea are 
also associated with low progesterone.  
SPECIFIC DYNAMIC ACTION  
Stillman's diet book is one of the few contemporary 
publications to mention the fact that "speci fic dynamic 
action" of proteins leads to a variable fattening effect for a 
given number of calories. This is a good point in an 
otherwise poor book, and it is in direct contradiction to a 
popular establishment argument, that "a calorie is a 
calorie," and t hat weight loss is possible only by cutting 
calories or exercising. "Increased energy expenditure" is 
misleading, because the specific dynamic action of proteins 
(and of unsaturated fatty acids) increases energy 
expenditure with out changing overt activity . 
The idea that "a calorie is a calorie," or a simple calorie 
counting approach fails to recognize not only the specific 
dynamic action of proteins (the action of oils is usually called 
"uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation"), but also  fails to 
recognize events at th e organismic level, such as insulin 
secretion, which form a link between the form in which food is 
taken (composition and timing) and the behavior, appetite, 
and metabolism. For example, an active brain can burn about 
half o f all the energy consumed by the body. If brain activity 
is depressed, a very large percentage of the food consumed 
becomes available for making fat. Most physicians, who 
should be in the habit of considering the person as a whole, 
will still tell you that  a "calorie is a calorie." The fact is that for 
many people, 100 calories of sugar is profoundly different 
from 100 calories of protein, even when both are taken as 
excess food beyond an adequate diet. The sugar will affect 
not only the way it is used, but  it will modify the body so that 
the other food is not used properly.  
Avoiding stimulation of the insulin -secreting beta cells 
in the pancreas will tend to make energy more continuously 
available for normal functions, including mental alertness, 
instead of  storing it as fat. This amounts to a kind of 
"systemic dynamic action." Diets which take advantage of  
85this principle are Atkins' low carbohydrate diet, and Gor -
don's "Wisconsin" diet which involves frequent small meals 
and a fairly high prot ein intake. The type of protein is 
important, since some kinds suppress the thyroid and slow 
metabolism when used chronically in large amounts.  
Sometimes eating more protein will increase heat 
production, but this can't happen unless the thyroid is 
working  fairly well.  
HCG  
Many reducing clinics are using injections of the preg -
nancy hormone, Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin, for the 
purpose of making reducing diets easier and possibly 
improving fat distribution. This hormone shifts energy me -
tabolism toward the use of fat rather than sugar, and so 
allows the blood sugar level to rise. This suppresses 
appetite. The hormone is produced by the placenta to make 
sugar available for the growing fetus. It helps the placenta to 
develop fully, and has been shown to have a profound 
influence on the development of the brain of the fetus. HCG 
and similar hormones produce more intelligent  offspring both 
in animals and humans.  
A suppressed or "quack" method of diagnosing for 
cancer has been to use a "pregnan cy" test on the urine of 
the patient (Beard Anthrone Test), because it was believed 
that the same metabolic shift occurs in both cancer and 
pregnancy. It is now recognized by normal scientists that 
cancers produce many peptide hormones, frequently in -
cludi ng HCG, so the pregnancy test should sometimes work 
as a cancer test, though it probably isn't reliable.  
Recently, Dr. G.G. Costa and others at the Medical 
College of Virginia developed a test for cancer which 
probably involves this "pregnancy metabolism." They feed 
the patient some radioactive fat, and a person with even a 
very small cancer will breathe out about three times as much 
radioactive carbon dioxide, showing that the metabolism 
shifts toward fat mobilization at an early stage of canceriza -
tion.  
Cancers, like embryos, live mostly on sugar. High blood 
sugar is maintained by causing the body to consume  itself 
(fat and protein) while leaving sugar for the growing tissue.  
HCG is very important for the health and intelligence of 
babies. It certainly should make reducing easier, but at 
present it seems risky, since it could promote the growth of a 
hidden ca ncer. Until it can be shown that this doesn't occur, I 
think HCG should be used only during pregnancy, when it is 
helpful in strengthening the placenta. Some cancers are 
caused to grow faster by pregnancy, and HCG might have  
86the same effect. However, it might also turn out to help in 
treating some kinds of hypoglycemia. It shouldn't be sup -
pressed mindlessly, but neither should it be promoted 
mindlessly.  
NOTE FOR DIETERS  
While it is true that the hypothetical "well balanced 
meal" can provide adequate nutrition for most people, you 
should remember that part of that concept, well balanced," 
is the assumption that the total intake will be big enough to 
supply the "proper" amo unt of calories, usually between 
2,000 and 3,000 per day. The three areas in the world with 
the greatest life span have a normal diet of about 1200 -1900 
calories per day. Although standard texts still claim that 
1600 calories a day is the minimum for maint aining body 
weight, recent studies showed that some women can't lose 
even on 1000 calories a day. The attitude generally has 
been that if a woman doesn't lose weight on 1200 calories 
per day she must be cheating. A "normal" diet has to be, 
among other thin gs, one which doesn't produce destructive 
obesity. But have the advocates of the unsupplemented well 
balanced diet studied the proportion of the Recommended 
Daily Allowance in a 1200 calorie diet? Until the question 
has been studied properly, it isn't scie ntific to oppose 
supplements or special foods. Many Americans, especially 
women, deliber ately restrict their food intake, so this is a 
question of general concern.  
POPULAR REDUCING DIETS  
First, the worst: Dr. Stillman's "inches off diet" is low in 
protein  and designed to cause muscles to atrophy. This 
tends to make a person flabby, shapeless, and weak. By 
shrinking active tissue, it makes it easier to put on fat, and 
harder to use it up. His other diet, low in carbohydrate, is the 
same as Atkins'. The A.M. A. has been warning about the 
dangers of this "ketogenic"  diet, and of course it could be 
dangerous to a diabetic who takes insulin and then eats no 
carbohydrate. But both sides of the argument were present -
ed in Medical Counterpoint, and Dr. Atkins cited several doz -
en appropriate scientific publications to support his position. 
The man supporting the A.M.A.'s position found about half a 
dozen references to cite — one of them was a textbook 
documenting his quotation of the first law of thermodyn -
amics. May be there is a valid reason for opposing this diet 
even under a doctor's supervision, but if there is, the A.M.A. 
hasn't demonstrated that it knows what it is. The Eskimos  
87who used to live on meat and fat all winter seem to have proven 
that pe ople can tolerate such a diet.  
Many dietitians insist that you must have at least 100 
grams of carbohydrate daily because the brain "uses 
glucose." However, the brain can adapt to using the ketones 
which result from fat oxidation.  
Gordon's "Wisconsin" diet  provides about 40 grams of 
carbohydrate with 90 grams of protein in a daily diet of about 
1250 calories, and so is making use of the principle of low 
carbohydrate intake, though to a moderate degree which 
most doctors find acceptable — especially since th ere is a 
strict limitation on calories. The most interesting part of 
Gordon's diet is that the day's food is divided into at least six 
meals, or three meals and three snacks. This procedure is 
based on experiments with animals, in which the rats that 
learn ed to eat their daily ration all in one meal got fatter and 
fatter, while rats that ate the same amount, but could nibble 
on it whenever they wanted, didn't get fatter. In the wild 
state, this would be useful, since it would mean that when the 
animal found  food it could store a large part of it as fat, to 
use later when food was scarce. But when food is always 
available, instead of getting fat the nibbler feels more 
energetic and spends the energy in activity. I have worked 
for a company (Medical Diet Servi ce, in Portland and Seattle) 
that has kept records on thousands of people using the 
Wisconsin diet, and the system seems very effective. Coun -
seling and "portion controlled" packaging of food are part of 
the program there, but a motivated person could get similar 
results, weighing their portions on a food scale and avoiding 
all refined carbohydrates. Getting some protein, carbohy drate 
and fat in each meal or snack seems desirable for many 
hypoglycemics, but often changes have to be made such as 
increasing the calories and eating more often. Diabetics 
sometimes use the same diet.  
I have seen publicity about something called the NASA 
astronauts' diet, and was impressed by the large amount of 
refined sugar in it. One of the newspaper stories about it 
included a picture of a broken -down astronaut. I'm not sure 
what the purpose of the diet is, but I wouldn't advise a friend 
to eat it.  
People talk about the "Mayo diet" — I think it consists of 
grapefruit and bacon — but the Mayo Clinic regularly denies 
any connect ion with it. I don't advise anyone to eat com -
mercial bacon, because of the nitrite which is added to it. The 
nitrite combines with amino acids to make a type of chemical, 
the nitrosamines, which are known to be powerful cancer -
inducing agents. The chemica ls appear in dangerous con-
centrations if "preserved" meats are left at room tempera ture 
for a few hours. The smoke used in bacon, ham and  
88sausages is also suspected of causing cancer. And the 
amount of salt in bacon would probably cause ret ention of 
water (temporarily; most people adjust quickly to altered 
salt intake). Otherwise, the "Mayo diet" probably works for 
some people who can't lose weight because of their craving 
for carbohydrates, and are too lazy to learn a little about 
nutrition . It would eventually cause cramps, tooth decay and 
softening of the bones because of the small amount of 
calcium and magnesium  
DIET PILLS  
Amphetamines mimic the action of the "alarm" part of 
the nervous system (sympathetic) and so raise the level of 
blood  sugar; this is probably the mechanism (or part of it) 
which suppresses appetite. Low blood sugar is associated 
with hyperactivity, and this is proba bly why the same drug is 
effective for the hundreds of thousands of crazy kids who 
get it so they will sit still in school; coffee works as well in 
hyperactivity, and might also help dieters. Another drink, 
desert tea or squaw tea (ephedra) is also effective. Coffee, 
unlike other stimulants, activates the thyroid gland.  
However, a recent study found that in a g roup of 100 
patients with Hodgkin's disease, 19 of them had previously 
used amphetamines, while only three out of 100 matched 
controls used them. This is apparently another effect of 
mimicking stress, or forcing the blood sugar up. Tonsillec -
tomies have al so been associated with an increased rate of 
Hodgkin's disease. Stress damages lymphoid tissue. and 
tonsils are composed of this tissue; Hodgkin's disease 
affects the same kind of tissue.  
It has been found that diet pills are only temporarily 
effective, an d when discontinued the fat returns.  
FAT: IDEAS FOR GETTING OFF A PLATEAU  
Fiber, such as two raw carrots per day. Coffee, as a 
trial, when there aren't reasons against it. Avoiding cabbages 
(unless cooked), mustard, radishes.  Try going off estrogen 
treatment — usually, natural progesterone works better for 
controlling menopause symptoms, is less toxic, and 
stimulates the conversion of food to heat and energy, and 
use of stored fat. Vitamin' A and pantothenic acid promote 
natur al progesterone synthesis. Iodine, manganese, and 
cobalt are all possible problems in thyroid functioning. 
Related to hormones and blood sugar, get the liver healthy,  
89for example by eating liver at least twice a week, etc. 
Consider allergens,  like onions, etc., tha t could be disturbing 
the liver . Sleeping less will help keep blood sugar up and fat 
down, unless the brain is really tired. Lower room tempera -
ture and brighter lights will stimulate the thy roid. If acne or 
dandruff occur,  a vitamin A deficiency is suggested. Vitamin 
B12 and vitamin E are both needed to make use of vitamin A 
efficiently. Gelatin helps keep the blood sugar up, by 
stimulating glucagon release, and so helps control hunger. 
Medium chain fatty acids, found in coconut oil,  are effective 
in turning off fat synthesis in the liver.  
ONE WOMAN'S TYPICAL DIET FOR A DAY  
Soon after waking, a piece of fruit.  For breakfast, an egg 
and cereal or toast (using pre -soaked grain for the cereal or 
bread); milk on cereal, butter on toast. Two hours after 
breakfast, a snack of cheese (1/2 ounce) and raw carrot. For 
lunch, a tuna salad; fruit or milk, if more calories are needed. 
For supper, maybe oyster stew and a salad and a potato — 
or, a chicken breast, well boiled spinach or broccoli, and 
fruit. Just before bed, another snack of milk and fruit.  
SWELLING UP (EDEMA)  
Proteins are very large molecules, which don't pass  very 
easily through the walls of blood vessels — and if they do 
leak out of the blood vessels into the space around cells, 
there are enzymes there that can dissolve them. So the blood 
stream maintains a high concentration of proteins, normally, 
which by o smosis tends to make water enter the blood from 
the space around the tissue cells. These proteins are largely 
produced by the liver. If the liver isn't functioning well, or if 
there is general stress, or if there isn't enough protein in the 
diet, these pro teins tend to disappear, with the result that 
water accumulates outside the blood vessels. In the morning, 
this water will be visible as puffiness in the face, especially 
under the eyes, but by evening gravity will have moved it to 
the feet and ankles.  
Not enough protein and too much sodium are the most 
common causes of edema. High estrogen just before men -
struation often causes it. Estrogen promotes retention of 
sodium, which in turn helps the body to hold water. Myx -
edema, which results from insufficient thyroid hormone. 
involves leakage of proteins out of the blood vessels, and 
apparently a shortage of the enzymes which should dissolve 
them. High estrogen blocks various proteolytic enzymes, 
apparently including those which release thyroxine from the  
90colloid in the thyroid gland since it causes colloid to ac -
cumulate (colloid goiter) while reducing hormone 
release. It also antagonizes the actions of thyroxine on 
tissues. Besides eating adequate protein, it is necessary 
to have adequate v itamin A and zinc for efficient protein 
synthesis. Vitamin C and rutin (grapefruit is a good 
source) are needed to maintain integrity of blood vessel 
walls. Other nutrients are needed for normal liver 
functioning.  
Chronic edema contributes to premature wri nkling 
and other signs of aging.  
Members of the cabbage family (including radishes, 
mustard, broccoli and cauliflower) contain a chemical 
that interferes with thyroid function; cooking reduces this 
effect. Peanuts and soybeans can also interfere with 
thyro id func tion, but they act in the intestine, preventing 
absorption of iodine, so their effect could be overcome 
by eating a little extra iodine. These or similar anti -
thyroid materials in various foods apparently account for 
the existence of goiters and cr etinism in some areas 
where the soil contains a normal amount of iodine. The 
absence of other nutrients, such as cobalt, can 
contribute to the development of goiters.  
                                   EXERCISE 
In the 1950's a national survey revealed that  
physical competence in the US had deteriorated, but it 
took J.F.Ken nedy's example to make exercise popular. 
While jogging became popular for preventing heart 
disease, we were frequently told by experts how many 
miles a person has to run to burn off a pou nd of fat. 
However, in Russia, phy siologists always remember to 
include the brain in their calculations, and it turns out 
that a walk through interesting and pleasant 
surroundings consumes more energy than does harder 
but more boring exercise. An active b rain consumes a 
tremendous amount of fuel.  
In the last century, Sechenov  found that exercising 
one hand strengthens not only that hand, but also the 
other. Brain activity stimulates growth and alteration of 
tissues, such as the muscles. Once I decided to attend a 
modern dance class which began the next week. After two 
or three  days of visualizing myself in unusual postures and 
movements, my muscles started feeling the way they do 
the day after a long hike, though I hadn't actually done any 
exercise. This effect of nerves on other tissues is called 
their trophic effect: it actua lly changes the chemical 
composition of muscle, its weight, and other properties. In 
the US,  yoga is usually thought of either as a system of 
exercises, or as a strange sort of religious practice. 
However, at least some of the Hindu yogic traditions 
consid ered visualization to be the  
91point of the exercise, and recognized that the body could be 
powerfully influenced by mental activity. Recently psy -
chologists have claimed that attention and visualization can 
cause breasts to enlarge. Even se nsory nerves (such as the 
pain sensing nerves in the cornea of the eye) have a 
powerful trophic influence — so maybe it isn't just a myth 
about massage being useful in reducing. Bright lights also 
stimulate hormone production and energy metabolism, and 
increase muscle tone.  
Many dietitians claim that exercise doesn't increase the 
need for protein, but the Russians have found that a com -
bination of exercise and increased protein intake can in -
crease the muscle mass. In a woman, this process can not 
only impr ove grace and body proportions, but it also in -
creases the body's ability to burn up fat. Other nutrients are 
needed for using protein properly, and for maintaining 
optimum nerve functioning. However, if the exercise 
produces too much stress and not enough  muscle action, 
muscles will atrophy as a result of cortisone's shifting amino 
acid metabolism into glucose production. Lactic acid 
production (getting out of breath) is the main signal of the 
need to produce new glucose. Therefore, "aerobic" exer cise 
is the most stressful. Cortisone not only causes atrophy of 
skin, muscles and immune system, but it even has been 
found to accelerate aging changes in the brain.  
Stress uses progesterone and can cause menstrual 
periods to stop. Girls who begin regular exercis e (such as 
dancing) before puberty have later sexual development.  
Exercise increases blood clotting, and so can increase 
the risk of strokes and heart attacks. Some doctors have 
been reporting increased incidence of flat feet, varicose 
veins, and prolapsed  uterus among joggers. Walking is a 
better form of exercise.  
ONE MEGAVITAMIN PROGRAM  
Each person has unique nutritional requirements, and 
these will vary under different circumstances, but here is a 
program that some people use during stress. Ninety grams a 
day of protein, preferably including liver, eggs, milk and 
seafoods. Fruits and starchy vegetables can make up the 
rest of the calories. Calcium and magnesium, 1200 mg. 
each, potassium chloride 2 to 4 grams, zinc 20 to 30 mg., 
iodine about a fifth of a m illigram, and manganese and other 
trace minerals from seafoods, such as kelp. Vitamin B1, 5 to 
20 mg. Vitamin B2, 20 to 30 mg., Niacin, 100 to 500 mg., 
with the requirement sometimes increasing just before 
menstruation. Vitamin B6, 10 to 50 mg. Pantothenic  acid, 
100 to 500 mg. Folic acid  from 1 to 5 mg. Biotin, 1 mg. 
Vitamin B12, 25 to 100  
92micrograms (100 micrograms is the same as one tenth 
milligram). Inositol and choline, about 500 mg. each. Vitamin 
A, 50,000 to 100,000 units, always tak en with vitamin E (200 
to 400 units of d -alpha tocopherol). Rutin and the bioflavon -
oids are sometimes used when capillaries are abnormally 
fragile (some types of purpura, petechial hemorrhages, and 
spontaneous bruising have this cause). Vitamin D from fis h 
liver oil, up to 2000 units a day in winter unless pregnant. The 
evidence for vitamin D toxicity is based on the synthetic form 
of the vitamin, but remember that vitamins A and D (and other 
oils) can be toxic in large amounts. It's interesting to compare  
the official propaganda about vitamin toxicity with the official 
silence about many of the dangers of drugs and food 
additives. A few major medical and pharmaceutical crimes 
are documented in the book 200,000,000 Guinea Pigs. In the 
U.S., vitamin K is ava ilable only by prescription, but is 
contained in leaves. In the U.S.S.R., vitamin B15 is 
recognized and used, but in the U.S. it is utterly banned: the 
man who discovered it insulted the A.M.A. The same man 
also studied laetrile (I -mandelonitriles), someti mes called 
vitamin B17, which is suppressed as a cancer therapy, but is 
a common substance that is available in many seeds, such as 
grains and apricot seeds. There has been a great campaign 
of lies against this material, including stories (even on a TV 
doctor program) that two or three apricot seeds can be lethal.  
Potassium chloride should not be used by anyone with bad 
kidney function, since it could accumulate, slowing or even 
stopping the heart. It should not be taken in tablet form, since a 
high local c oncentration stops intestinal movement, leaving the 
tablet in one spot where it can burn and cause ulceration. A 
potassium chloride powder (such as Morton's salt substitute, 
which is not contaminated with ammonium chloride) can be 
sprinkled on the food. It  is best to get your potassium from 
foods, such as fruit.  
ADAPTING TO A NEW DIET  
Enzymes are continually being destroyed and synthe sized 
in active tissues. When a vitamin binds to its enzyme, it helps 
to stabilize the enzyme against degradation, leading to a 
higher concentration of the enzyme. In the same way, the 
"substrate" of an enzyme (the material it changes chemically) 
can stabilize the enzyme. When we eat a diet that is very low 
in a particular nutrient, such as protein, we lose many of the 
enzymes  involved in handling that nutrient. Without those 
enzymes, a meal rich in protein, for example, can liberate more 
ammonia than the body can dispose of, and the person can be 
poisoned. Many vegetarians have  
93experienced this "toxic" effect of meat or cheese or milk, and 
so believe that "animals foods" can cause mental dullness. 
headaches, dizziness, etc. But for a meat eater, the same 
process can cause vegetables to produce gas, as slow 
carbohydrate digestion lets bacteria break them down. 
Changing to any new diet, or ending a fast, should be done 
gradually, allowing at least several days for enzyme adapta-
tion. The same rule would probably apply to nutritional 
supplements. If gas is a problem even when change of diet isn't responsible, a thyroid deficiency should be considered. 
Lack of stomach acid is typical in hypothyroidism, but is only 
one aspect of a generalized digestive depression.  
ENERGY ITSELF: CrP and ATP  
Although electronic energy is intimately involved in life, 
there are two chemi cals that are involved in maintaining the 
"energy charge" of cells, and it is the energy charge which is 
most immediately related to biological function and struc ture. 
Creatine phosphate (CrP) is a kind of energy reservoir for 
muscle, and in a vitamin E d eficiency creatine leaks out of the 
muscles. Aging also seems to involve defective creatine 
phosphate reserves (Verzar). Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
is more directly involved in all kinds of life function, for 
example maintaining the resting state of nerv es and muscles, 
and governing secretion, the retention of proteins, and the 
elimination of toxins. ATP is more stable than many chemists 
realize — it is only a lack of magnesium or an excess of 
calcium which destabilizes its molecular structure. This 
seems  to be involved in the sedative and anti -cramp actions 
of magnesium. Sensory nerves can release ATP into sur -
rounding tissues, and this seems to be part of their "trophic" 
influence on healing and inflammation. A.E. Needham 
(Growth Process of Animals) has discussed the possibility 
that it is a "vitamin": when added to the diet of animals, it 
increases their growth. This must have some relevance to our 
nutrition, since fresh food contains abundant ATP. A day or 
so after an animal dies, "rigor mortis" develop s because of 
the disappearance of ATP; a similar loss of ATP occurs in 
plants as they die. For many decades, fresh food enthusiasts 
have spoken of the "life energy" in fresh foods. Unfortunately, most scientists and health professionals still like to myst ify 
the subject and deny that food could contain "vital energy," or 
that ATP could have nutritional significance.  
94GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF GOOD NUTRITION  
1. Minimize your requirements by avoiding unnecessary 
stress. In Oregon in the winter, use bright lights, balancing 
incandescent bulbs with fluorescent tubes.  
2. Avoid toxins. Run water 1 minute before using, and then 
only from the cold faucet. Do not cook tomatoes or fruit in 
iron or copper pans. Don't use pewter dishes. Avoid mineral 
oil and othe r solvents on skin or in air (most cosmetics 
contain mineral oil, and worse). Minimize contact with 
allergens. Be very careful with unsaturated oils, such as 
safflower, corn, and cod -liver oil: they destroy vitamin E and 
can cause cancer. The "heart diet" is a menace based on 
weird professional ignorance. These oils interfere with the 
thyroid gland.  
3. Grains, legumes, and some nuts (e.g., walnuts and 
peanuts) are highly allergenic. Soaking or sprouting them is 
very desirable. Cooking cabbage, broccoli, caulif lower, 
mustard, etc., will destroy chemicals which poison the 
thyroid gland. Laetrile and PABA inhibit the thyroid. Greens 
and potatoes (cooked) are good to substitute for bread 
(especially the factory -made kinds) and for beans. Soy 
beans are terribly over -rated.  
4. Eat frequently, using protein, fat, and carbohydrate at 
the same time, e.g., an egg and an orange, or a carrot with 
cheese. Fruit is the best source of carbohydrate; avoid 
uncooked starches such as nuts.  
5. Use complex foods, things close to their living state: eggs, 
sardines, leaves, milk, etc.  
6. Heat degrades protein. Canned or powdered milk has lost 
significant amounts of lysine, an important component of 
protein. The same applies to toasted cereals, nuts or beans. 
The heated lysine forms a carcino gen if a sugar is present, as 
in soybeans.  
7. Any drug alters your nutritional needs. Tobacco, iron, 
aspirin, estrogen, tranquilizers and diuretics must be taken 
into account. There are special diets for special needs.  
8. Don't get a " diagnosis" from anyone but a physician or 
other licensed person. But don't think that diagnosis is so 
scientific that you take an individual's opinion as the last 
word. For example, a girl had wasted away to 90 pounds 
and thought she would soon die from "pituitary atrophy," but  
95switching  from raw foods to milk and eggs allowed her to 
regain her weight. Diagnoses also sometimes label a serious 
condition as something less serious. The appropriateness of 
any diet will depend on the accuracy with which your 
nutritional needs are known.  
9. Beside s their content of the essential nutrients, all 
natural foods contain other materials, such as hormones. 
There are many nutrients which are useful, without being 
"essential" in the narrowest sense. Under some conditions, 
nutrients which are not normally es sential may become so. 
Nutrients that are synthesized by intestinal bacteria must be 
taken in the diet when antibiotics are used.  
10. If supplements are necessary, don't use them excessively 
— find what is enough, but don't forget the contaminants and 
adultera nts which may be present in pills, capsules and 
powders. Amino acids such as tryptophan or glutamic acid 
should not be used as isolated supplements. 
11. A few years ago, most of the nutritional problems that I 
saw were caused by physicians, by refined convenience 
foods, and by poverty. Recently, most of the problems 
seem to be caused by badly designed vegetarian diets, or 
by acceptance of the idea that 40 grams of protein per day 
is sufficient. The liver and other organs deteriorate rapidly 
on low -prote in diets. Observe the faces of the wheat- grass 
promoters, the millet- eaters, the "anti -mucus" dieters, and 
other low -protein people. Do they look old for their age?  
12. Everyone should know the basic principles of nutritional 
physiology and have a general idea of the chemical compo-
sition of foods. Otherwise, you will be confused by conflicting 
claims. Become your own expert — for example, if someone 
tells you not to eat fruits and proteins at the same meal, get 
a book on digestion and absorption of food from t he library, 
and read about interactions.  
13. Examine your basic assumptions about food and life 
and health, and those of the experts. Is the organism a 
rigidly determined genetic mechanism? Is it the sum of its 
past environments? Does it really assimilate the 
environment? Is it a desire for more life? What is pleasure? 
Is a person a spirit temporarily trapped in a large piece of 
meat? Scientific questions often take on a clearer meaning 
when you can see their ideological context.  
14. If someone who claims to be an authority belongs to a 
"professional organization," look at the publications of that  
96organization. What were they advocating 5 or 10 years ago? 
Are there financial motives behind their recommendations? 
Be suspicious, keep asking questions . 
VII. THE FUTURE  
HIDDEN MOTIVES  
When scientific or professional publications are fin anced 
or controlled by special financial interests, we should watch for distorted reasoning, distortion by selection, and plain 
misstatement of facts. The Nutrition Foundation, Inc., is an important source of nutritional information in the U.S. Their 
trustees include officers (presidents, vice presidents, 
chairmen of boards, chief executives) of these companies: Coca -Cola, Royal Crown Cola, Oscar Mayer, Miles Labora -
tories, Hoffmann-
LaRoche, Proctor & Gamble, Kellogg, 
Philadelphia Macaroni, Stauffer Chemical, Skinner Macar -
oni, Specialty Chemicals Group of ICI United States, and Dobbs -Life Savers. Can we expect their publications to be 
properly critical of synthetic food addi tives and highly 
refined foods?  
DISESTABLISH THE PROFESSIONS  
We hear a lot about the "controlled scientific studies" that 
supposedly have to be done before anyone can ad vocate 
something as risky as taking a nutritional supplement. The controlled nutritional studies that have been done always 
seem to have the wrong national origin, or have been 
published in "obscure journals," so that they can be ignored. I 
want to point out that many of these criticisms are incom -
petent not only because of what th ey ignore or suppress, but 
because of their double standard: if the scientific standards 
they demand of nutritional studies are applied to medicine, 
we have to say that there is no "adequate scientific basis" for many of the practices of modern medicine. T radition is 
extremely important in the practice of medicine. Consider the 
common appendectomy or tonsillectomy. Are these prac tices 
based on animal experimentation? On human 
experimentation? What animal disease would be comparable 
to appendicitis? Would human experimentation require the 
sham surgery which is a standard requirement in scientific 
animal studies? Sham surgery would require that people in the control group with appendicitis be cut open, without 
removing the appendix. Since the stress of surger y can  
97actually affect the immune system and various physiological 
processes, controlled studies would not be entirely unrea -
sonable. What other therapies have been compared with 
surgery in treating tonsillitis and appendicitis? If  you have 
seen the old horror m ovie, "Freaks," or if you went to a 
circus side show in the 1940's, you can visualize the effects 
of an operation called a "hemicorpectomy" that was favored 
about 35 years ago as a treatment for a cancer of the lower 
part of the body — it involved removal of the lower half of 
the body. What kind of "controlled scientific study" was this 
based on? The establishment has  committed itself to ex -
tremely  rigorous scientific standards in its attack on nutri -
tional therapies — and the re is an extremely large body of 
nutritional research which meets these standards. We are 
therefore perfectly justified in demanding that the food, 
drug, and medical industries meet the same rigorous 
standards. (Since I wrote the above, there have been som e 
studies of tonsillectomy and appendectomy. For example, 
acute ap pendicitis usually does not require surgery, 
according to the latest study.)  
A PROPOSED STUDY  
Many of the well publicized specialists in misinformation 
say that it is impossible for human b eings to be defici ent in 
vitamin E, and so we musn’ t try to draw any conclusions 
about human sterility or miscarriages from the animal studies 
which showed that vitamin E is essential for implanting the 
embryo and maintaining pregnancy. Technically, this i s 
known as Pig Ignorant Professionalism. The chemical 
processes in food don't care whether the food is consumed 
by rats or by people. When iron salts are added to food which 
contains vitamin E, the vitamin E is destroyed by the iron. 
When pregnant women ar e given pills containing up to 2000 
per cent of the daily iron requirement, this iron mixes with 
food. The amount of money that is spent on propaganda 
against vitamin E could support some simple little studies to 
determine whether inorganic iron supplement s increase the 
risk of miscarriage. This would seem to be a reasonable 
concern — is there equivalent evidence to justify the cam -
paign against vitamin E? I don't think so.  
PROTEIN AND STARVATION  
At first glance, proteins seem to be required in human 
nutrition, in fairly large amounts. Many people are dying of 
what is called a protein deficiency, or a combination of 
protein and calorie deficiencies.  
98But a Russian found that atmospheric nitrogen was 
incorporated into body proteins by highe r animals. It had 
been thought that only certain bacteria (such as live in the 
roots of legumes) could fix atmospheric nitrogen, turning it 
into ammonia for use in amino acids and proteins.  
Then an Australian group studied New Guinea high -
landers who lived  on sweet potatoes and bananas, and 
found they excreted vastly more nitrogen than they ate, yet 
they remained healthy. They guessed that nitrogen fixing 
bacteria lived in their intestines. It turned out that E. coli, 
which lives in everyone's intestine, gi ves the chemical 
reaction indicating nitrogen fixation.  
Then a group in Illinois (Dudka et al., Nature 232, 265, 
1971)  found that the amount of atmospheric nitrogen 
breathed in was not the same as the amount breathed out.  
What is essential seems to be the "carbon skeleton" of 
the essential amino acids. If the diet supplies these along 
with other nutrients, then protein seems to be not so essen -
tial in the diet. If fruits and vegetables can be found which 
contain these substances, then the world food problem  
could be easily solved. Why aren't starchy, sugary and oily 
plants (including bananas and sweet potatoes) being sur -
veyed to find a source of these nutrients? Since this special 
problem isn't "my field," I couldn't hope to get government 
financing for suc h a study. But someone should be doing it. 
(The protein quality of potatoes is higher, according to 
animal feeding experiments, than it should be, according to 
amino acid analysis. One of my students has demonstrated 
the presence of these. "amino acid equi valents" in 
potatoes.)  
REASONING ABOUT HEALTH  
"What is now proved was once only imagin'd"  
                                                          William Blake  
The famous logician, C.S. Peirce, said that a kind of 
tying -together, or "colligation," of "a variety of separately 
observed facts" is a "generally essential step in reasoning." 
This process is too often excluded from formal scientific 
reasoning.  
Tying together, forming chains of probable relationship, 
perceiving a cluster or conste llation — these are a 
necessary part of any productive scientific work. In working 
toward a scientific goal, such a perceived constellation or 
pattern will direct experimentation which attempts to fill in 
some of the blanks in the pattern. If certain blank s remain 
empty, it may be necessary to re -draw the road map leading 
to your goal. Sometimes a person will claim to have reached 
a certain goal using a strange new kind of roa d map; if the 
99goal is important, it's worth seeing whether the new map is a 
relia ble way to reach the goal. Magazines like Prevention 
are full of articles using this sort of goal -centered reasoning; 
there is nothing in the history of science to indicate that this 
isn't a valid way to proceed. However, there are some 
Establishment sloga ns that are being used in an effort to 
suppress any dissenting opinions in medicine and nutrition. 
"Raising false hopes" is one such slogan, as if being 
respectably sick meant aban doning all hope; but allowing 
the patient who stays under "proper medical c are" to hope 
for a miracle seems perfectly acceptable.  
DIETETICS OR NUTRITION?  
"Always be ready to speak your mind, and a base man 
will  avoid you."   William Blake 
Dr. Andrew Weil recently mentioned that, after getting 
his medical education at Harvard, he doesn't recommend 
going to doctors. He says "preventive medicine" is a phrase 
everyone uses, but doctors get no training in what it means -
for example, he said his training in nutrition consisted of a 
half hour lecture by a dietitian describing what diets were 
available at the hospital. Other medical schools give twice 
as much training in nutrition as Harvard, but even in a whole 
hour the doctor is likely to learn no thing more than that 
nutrition is a very simple matter of choosing the right menu 
from the list provided by a dietitian, and that "a normal 
balanced diet provides all the nutrients the body can use." 
On the basis of a 30 minute talk by a dietitian, the "Ha rvard 
educated physician" becomes an authority on nutrition (and 
everything else related to health, though their training has 
been mainly in sickness, not health), and his "professional 
opinion" is taken seriously by public and lawmakers.  
Since a 30 minute talk by a dietitian is given such 
tremendous weight in our culture and laws, we should know 
something about their training: such awesome power, if not 
divine, must come from the next highest authority, but since 
that seems to be the AMA, this would involve a circularity.  
Dietetics is often combined with home economics. It is 
still possible to become a dietitian without taking a single 
course in biochemistry. It isn't too surprising that the 
textbooks used in their nutrition courses contain little more 
than is in junior hig h Health texts. But it is odd that they 
criticize people with training in biochemistry (e.g., Linus 
Pauling, Adelle Davis, R.J. Williams) as not being qualified 
to talk about nutrition. According to a Registered Dietitian 
whose lecture preceded mine on a s ymposium for phar - 
100Ludwig Feuerback  macists, physiologists aren't qualified to talk about nutrition 
either, and "every quack in the country is calling himself a 
nutritionist." A friend of mine who visited the Oregon State 
University nutri tion department told me that a display there 
included books by these people (mentioned above) in a 
display on "nutritional quacks." Adelle Davis had a degree in dietetics and nutrition, from the University of California at 
Berkeley, and a masters degree in  biochemistry from the 
USC School of Medicine. Williams, a professor of bio -
chemistry (and the only biochemist to have been chosen as 
president of the American Chemical Society) has done 
research in nutrition for over 50 years, and is the discoverer 
of the B vitamin pantothenic acid, and did basic work on 
other B vitamins. Pauling, Nobel laureate in chemistry (as well as in peace), created much of the scientific foundation 
for modern medicine, physiological chemistry, and nutrition. 
Maybe someone is trying to glorify quackery by associating 
these people with the word? In judging comments about Linus Pauling, we should remember that U.S. scientists 
almost ostracized him when he got the Nobel Prize for 
peace, when war and nuclear testing were part of the respe ctable American Way. He was not allowed to travel 
abroad in the early 1950's, and this probably prevented him 
from getting another Nobel Prize for work with DNA. Many 
U.S. scientists who hated him for supporting peace now choose to call him a quack.  
A stud y found that people with more education are 
more likely to eat "health foods." However, a study done by Oregon State University nutritionists found that food fad -
dists' diets are no better than a normal diet (I don't know 
what they mean by normal; the US D epartment of 
Agriculture found that close to half of the US population has a nutritional deficiency, so normal is bad). The dietitian reporting the study on TV said that faddists avoid many of 
the good foods like white bread, and that we should follow a 
normal diet to "eat all the food God gave us."  
NUTRITION AND CONSCIOUSNESS  
"Worldly revolt of the individual comes from an interior 
revolt that has sought out health and natural physical processes subtle and gross."  
Michael McClure  
"...the conscious subject has for his object the infinity of his 
own nature."  
"One is what he eats."  
101"One food (agricultural) scientist is worth more than all 
the economists in the world."  
Karl Marx  
There are attitudes, ideologies, and institutions which 
hate anything that threatens to be useful. Effective know -
ledge is likely to upset everything that's neatly formalized, 
including the livelihood of the middle class. Commenting on 
the hostility of Freudian psychiatrists toward nutritional 
therapy for neuroses, Aldous Huxley said "poor fellows; 
what will become of them?" The anthropologist M. Harris 
says "Sometimes I think that the primary function of estab -
lishment anthropology is to fog the truth...It stays away from 
questions about the causes of war, the cause s of sexism, 
the causes of racism. It stays away from all statements of 
causality...Academics are the high priests of the inward -
turning consciousness that has spread through America."  
Nutritional knowledge threatens to be useful. Bio -
chemically trained pe ople like Linus Pauling, Roger Williams, 
Adelle Davis and Abram Hoffer who write about nutrition are 
called "quacks" by establishment dietitians who may be 
trained in home economics, and who may not understand, for 
example, how an iron pill might cause ane mia. 
Mystification of food takes many forms. I remember 
seeing in Mexico a horribly poor (i.e. probable daily income 
less than 20 US cents) woman feeding her baby Pepsi Cola 
and pieces of a white wheat roll. Those things are heavily 
advertised in Mexico, a nd even to people who can't read they 
represent "class." The institution of eating three meals a day 
and dessert after supper is a mystification of food. Trimming 
the fat off your meat and avoiding pork to "keep your 
cholesterol down" is a multiple mystifi cation.  
Honest ignorance exists, but there is also deliberate 
falsification: consider the claim that additives are used so that 
we can have high quality food. A publication intended for 
industrial food chemists tells the story more bluntly, warning 
the man ufacturer that it isn't always the best policy to buy the 
lowest grade of food and then make it palatable with addi -
tives, because sometimes the adulterants cost more than is 
saved. In other words, profit is the only important factor, and 
sometimes, concei vably, it might be profitable to sell good 
food.  
When you start looking for ulterior motives, you might 
conclude that your physician is greedy, that your chemistry 
professor has a contract with the rubber company that 
makes ice cream, and that food produce rs are so pleased 
with their profits that they don't care about the increasing 
numbers of deformed and mentally retarded babies, or the 
increasing rate of cance r and diabetes. If you do this, then  
102you are probably  involved in a demystification of the world. 
Eating good food can alter your consciousness; so can thinking 
about how we're going to get it.  
ABOUT FEELINGS  
About 1959, I realized that feelings of love and anxiety had 
particular forms and locations in the front of the body. 
Gradually, I learned that these could be modified intention ally, 
and that social feelings and senses of personality and place consisted of "conformations" of these plexuses. Even in brief social encounters (of a few seconds), these body  feelings may 
take on a conformation of openness and love, of sexual feeling, or of a closed anxious coldness. In the pleasant experience, the visceral feeling resembles channels which open and extend 
outward toward the other person; at times, these chann els 
seem to make powerful contact with the other person's. 
Occasionally, when I feel very energetic, especially on sunny 
days, I have an intense sensation of sweetness that seems to 
travel up from behind and below my navel, to a spot behind my sternum. I c all this my body's smile energy, because it feels the 
same as the pleasure which goes with a smile.  
When I described these perceptions to an older person, she 
reported having lost those feelings in middle age, and she said it seemed that they had been "ins ulated" by the extra fat she had 
put on. (People who don't notice those sensations may wonder how a person could feel insulated from something which is inside oneself. The point is that they are sensations of openness 
of the body to the world.) Her comments caused me to associate 
the feelings with thyroid function and metabolic rate. I have noticed that when I feel sluggish from bad weather or diet, those 
feelings seem muffled, or barely perceptible.  
Recently, I described these body feelings to a friend (in her 
early twenties) who wasn't sure what I meant. For several weeks, she didn't experience anything that seemed like my descriptions. 
She began taking thyroid a few weeks ago. Within a few days of the time that she had increased her dosage (from 
1/2 to 1 grain), 
she told me that she had begun to feel things she had never felt before, feelings of openness and intensity in her body. Another friend, the same age, said she had orgasms easily when she was 
18 and 19, but in the last 2 or 3 years had been unable to. She 
claimed to have no emotional feelings in her body, even when she desires, except for vibration when she is sexually excited, 
and an awareness of something in her pelvis. When I mentioned 
the association between thyroid and nerve reflexes, she recal led 
that she had been put on a large dose of thyroid hormone in  
103her late teens, just about the time she discovered she could 
have orgasms. Moving to Oregon, her new doctor had taken 
her entirely off thyroid. She stopped having orgasms, and  
begin to have frequent suicidal depressions. A little thyroid 
stopped her depressions, without increasing her pulse, 
which was only 60. She consistently increased her use of 
thyroid, and has since reported having orgasms.  
Athletic training is known to slo w the pulse. Cortisone, 
produced by stress, inhibits the thyroid gland. (When the 
thyroid is low, less oxygen is needed, so this is a useful 
adaptation for increasing endurance.) These hormonal 
changes are now known to produce sterility in both men and 
wom en. Estrogen, used for birth control, also elevates 
cortisone and interferes with thyroxine. Estrogen, like a 
thyroid deficiency, can lower sexual responsiveness. My 
guess is that heavy exercise, such as running, will lower 
sexual responsiveness as it lowe rs fertility. Emotional 
stress, by causing the same hormonal changes, would have 
the same effects. Nutritional deficiencies and environmental 
toxins, by causing stress and hormone imbalance, could do 
the same.  
If someone has never experienced a full sexual  re-
sponse, it is meaningless to ask about the occurrence of 
"orgasms." Ease or difficulty in responding sexually, though, 
and perceptions of bodily emotions, might serve as a subtle 
indicator of hormone balance, especially thyroid sufficiency.  
DESIRE, THE  LIBERATOR OF SEXUAL OBJECTS  
Men, out of touch with their energies and natural 
desires and dreams, have kept women in chains. Passive 
and weak, women have kept to themselves the wholeness 
and richness of their experience.  
Reasoning and competing men have b elieved that they 
possessed women, but the centered and prolific human 
female world was overlooked by the greedy devouring male, 
who took part of her existence and believed he had taken it 
all. 
Wishing to be liberated, no longer passive and weak, 
many women are becoming reasoning competitors, but in 
doing so are losing contact with their bodily energies, 
desires, and dreams.  
It is obviously hard to desire the kind of man who has 
produced, and been produced by, western civilization. He is 
the competitive  athlete or the competitive sedentary busi -
ness -man, or the competitive intellectual rationalizing his 
superiority over all beings.  
Sexual desire has been so closely involved with en -
slavement, many women feel very concretely that desire  
104must be overcome if they are to gain full human status. Being 
a sexual obje ct has meant being enslaved and diminished. 
Gaining the social, economic, cultural, intellectual, and 
sexual rights of men will not liberate anyone, because these 
rights and roles are where the ugliness of maleness is. It is 
not the penis that is fascistic, domineering, exploitive, 
corrupting. The penis is the male animal -flower, a soft -firm 
dildo, a warm dream.  
All objects are desirable, no object enslaves; imposed 
systems enslave.  
If we see that to be an animal, to be human, is to desire, 
then we see that to be understood is to be understood as 
desire. If our perception is purified, there is no mere object.  
In a society which considers a corporation to be a 
person, we have to be ca reful when we ask to be treated as 
"a person, not an object." The society's definition of a 
person is something like "an emptiness with rights." We 
want equal rights, but we also want equal fullness. To 
achieve that human fullness, men have to be freed from 
their abstract reasoning aggressive possessiveness, and 
women have to be freed from their passivity.  
Intersubjectivity  is possible when we recognize a mutual 
desire for growth. This kind of contact expands our self and our 
known world, while allowing the other to expand.  
Men relate by looking at the world together. Men and 
women relate by seeing each other as perspectives  on the 
world. A sexual subjectivity, rather than a sexual object.  
Intense relationships between women are just beginning to be 
explored. Intense relationships between men and women should 
be further explored — new selves will be evolved, and new 
methods f or exploring will be discovered. But before this is 
possible for everyone, the whole system of capitalist 
imperialism has to be changed, so that being human is not 
defined primarily as having an economic role.  
Men and women have real differences, but the n ature of 
these differences still has to be investigated, in the course of 
mutually supported growth.  
FERTILE PAIRING  
The sexual pair is the unit of invention.  
It's as though the brain of each were incomplete. 
Undoubtedly culture exaggerates some biological 
differences, but it seems to erect barriers to the kind of 
interaction that leads to dreaming discovery. Change and 
adventure are important for our energy sys tem, and the 
present authoritarian culture is opposed to fundamental 
change.  
105In terms of hemispheric balance, girls depart less 
radically from bilateral symmetry, and reach a mature 
stability somewhat earlier. This is consistent with their 
characteristic "global" consciousness, as opposed to the 
male's analytic style; culture is definitely a factor in shaping 
these styles, but the larger brain /body weight ratio of the 
female is likely to be involved — that is, more brain would 
tend to achieve  better balance.  
At first, this feminine brain superiority, if we generalize 
from the general mammalian meaning of the brain/body 
weight ration, seems to be a put -down of men. However, the 
view I am proposing attributes some virtue to the masculine 
imbalan ce itself.  
When I noticed a similarity of feeling between excited, 
dreaming, tottering mental exploration and the plain hungry 
low blood -sugar state, I realized that a certain kind of 
alertness is like a falling away from old habits.  
In this view, masculine consciousness would be char -
acterized as impatiently stumbling along into new territory, 
while the female provides the understanding necessary for 
steering an intelligent course.  
More creative individuals of either sex probably exper -
ience both o f these tendencies, cyclically, to a greater 
degree than does an individual who remains deeply imbed -
ded in the culture, but real mental intercourse of the sexes 
seems to offer the greatest support for creativity.  
from "EVOLUTION AS HUMAN SCULPTURE," 1967  
. . . we can begin to think of ourselves, our bodies, as 
objects, without the old perverse connotations of "posses -
sion," "non -living," "passive -mechanical." We can recog nize 
that in changing our viewpoints, we are changing our bodies 
in real structural w ays, and that in spite of the magical 
nature of our functioning, there are real bodily inertias that 
we have to work with.  
Wanting to complexif y our body structures, so that the 
inertias will interfere as little as possible with the activity of 
our conscio usness, we will use a sort of "material dialectic." 
When everything seems to be perfectly under control, and is 
going smoothly, and not much is being learned, it means that 
we are structurally complex enough for the demands of the 
situation, and that below  the surface of experience there are 
inertia structures that are slowing our multiplication of 
viewpoints.  
This means that to evolve, and to expand our cons -
ciousness, it's time to look for the most improbable, the most 
demanding, confusing, even threateni ng, situation. The 
feeling of adventure that directs the choice of activities is the  
106same as that of a sculptor, thinking and imposing intentions 
as far as possible, but finding new intentions and new 
problems in the act of physically attacki ng the stone with the 
hands and arms, and in the constant discovery of essential 
and accidental properties of the stone. We have to believe 
that there is something really new and important to be 
discovered.  
The redundant torpor of jazz, and the patterned g estures 
of most dancing are the opposite of adventure, and these 
things assert that past and present are sufficient, that 
pleasures are not formative.  
The sculptural feeling for the massiveness and resis -
tance of  your  own body in confronting reality is involved in  
the sexual  process,  which is another dimension of evolution.  
For the active consciousness, perception is emotion; desire is 
inherent in the perception of a mate, and perception of self  is part 
of the perception of other. For the old consciousness,  
therefore, desirable characteristics were generally not 
related to evolutionary values, since the self had only the  
dimmest awareness of such values. A woman's need for 
security, in a society which makes wome n dependent, will 
cause her to be attracted by wealth and power, without 
reference to her subtler needs.  
Experience is stored in our tissues, and is passed on, 
but not as Darwinian "gemmules." What is stored is flexibility,  
potential, and energy capacity. The mate who can challenge  
by complementary perceptions arouses deep energetic 
processes, felt as desire, and as knowledge projecting itself  
into the future. The hormonal and probably electrical  
changes, the subtle structural changes that appear as 
increas ed stickiness, hysteresis, are part of the individual's 
organismic development, but they are also at the heart of  
evolution of the species. Great loves make great people. By 
recognizing, knowing, responding to, more of the other, we 
evolve the organ of res ponse, the brain.  
If this stuff is true, then reproduction should be delayed until 
there is maximum capacity for response, and a max imum of 
personal ripeness, to elicit such intense and general responses 
from a mate.  
107APPENDIX  
SOME DEFINITION S 
Carbohydrate: a molecule containing carbon, oxygen, and 
hydrogen, e.g., sugars and starches. The formula is, roughly, any 
multiple  of HCOH.  
Collagen and connective tissue: one of the best known 
"pure" proteins, gelatin, is made by boiling animal skin or 
other tough tissue to extract collagen ("glue source") which is 
the main protein component of animals. It forms a tough jelly 
in which cells are embedded. Other macromolecule s, 
especially hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulfate, are major 
components of other extra -cellular materials, such as joint 
fluid, eye jelly, cartilage, tendons, etc. Gelatin lacks essential 
amino acids (cysteine, tryptophan) and so nutritionally will not  
serve as a protein source for general use.  
Dietetics: (see Nutrition).  
Glycolysis: the degradation of glucose (or glycogen) to 
pyruvic  acid, with the production of a small amount of 
energy (ATP), relative to the very efficient oxidative 
production of ATP which consumes pyruvic (or lactic) acid, 
or fat (or acetic acid) or carbohydrates derived from amino 
acids. Alcohol not only is oxidize d as a "fat," but it 
apparently inhibits the wasteful conversion of protein to fuel 
and so allows protein to be used more efficiently. The 
wasteful glycolysis of cancer can sometimes be controlled 
by such "physiological" means.  
Lipids or fats: molecules co ntaining mainly carbon and 
hydrogen, though biological fats typically have a carbon -
oxygen -oxygen group at the end, which increases their 
solubility in water. These relatively soluble fats are the fatty 
acids, which can combine with glycerin to form trigly cerides 
(three fats, one glycerin). We synthesize many fats, but 
some others must be included in the diet — essential fatty 
acids, or "vitamin F."  
Lipolysis: the breaking down of fats, it commonly refers to 
the breakdown of storage triglycerides into fatty  acids and 
glycerol.  
Minerals: generally, these are all the elements that are 
needed by organisms, but which can be found in nature 
independently, though carbon, nitrogen, and water are not  
108called  minerals. They have structural, chemical, and 
cata lytic functions.  
Mitochondria: small "compartments" in the cytoplasm 
(the viscous part of the cell, everything but the nucleus), 
they are responsible for much of the cell's energy 
production (as ATP) and oxygen consumption.  
Nutrition: a branch of biology or physiology, an area of 
scientific study which overlaps many other areas, 
including biochemistry, physiological chemistry, 
reproduction and growth, microbiology, general and 
comparative physiology. etc. Easily distinguished from 
dietetics, which tends to be concerned more narrowly with 
the regulation of food intake, but also with cooking and 
food prices, serving food, and professionalism.  
Proteins: with water, proteins are the main structural com -
ponents of the animal body. They are also the catalysts 
(enzymes) which govern the rate of almost every chemical 
reaction in the organism. The third type of protein is used 
for immunity: antibodies. Proteins are synthesized in cells 
in a linear manner, connecting many (50 to a few hundred) 
amino acids in a row, but the most soluble (hydrophilic, 
water -loving) normally take on a compact, roughly 
spherical form . They are classed as "macromolecules," 
molecules which are so large that they have special 
properties; it is sometimes more useful to think of them as 
a "system" than as a unit. When proteins are digested, 
they are broken down (more or less completely) into amino 
acids. These smaller molecules (a little smaller than sugar 
molecules, they weigh roughly 100 time s more than a 
hydrogen atom) are composed of carbon, hydrogen, 
oxygen, nitrogen, and sometimes sulfur. Along the 
"backbone" of a protein, the atoms nitrogen, carbon, and 
another carbon, from each amino acid, repeat regularly: N -
C-C, -N-C- C, -N-C- C, etc. Th e basic amine (ammonia- like) 
nitrogen at one end  combines with the acidic carbon at the 
other end, and a variety of other atoms are attached to the 
middle carbon, as a "side -chain." The nature of the side 
chain is most important in determining the function  of the 
protein. If the nitrogen is removed from the amino acid, 
what remains is a small acidic molecule, which in some 
cases is a common "fuel" molecule. Eight (roughly) of the 
22 amino acids have a "carbon skeleton" which we can't 
synthesize, so they mus t be included in the diet — as 
protein, amino acid, or possibly as "skeleton."  
Starch: a "macromolecule" consisting of strings of sugar 
molecules. They may be used for storage or for structural 
purposes, as in connective tissues. Glycogen is the storage  
109starch of animals.  
Sugar: a small carbohydrate, usually from 3 to 12 carbon 
atoms. An alcohol is intermediate between sugar and fat, 
usually with one or two oxygens per molecule.  
Vitamins: any chemical which is necessary for life and has 
to be obtained in the diet, in small amounts — i.e., specific 
substances other than  fuel molecules, protein (or amino 
acids) or minerals. The category includes, roughly, every -
thing that's essential that doesn't fit another category. There 
is a popular ten dency to give them the neat definition of "co -
enzymes," that is, a catalytic group other than a mineral 
which is associated with a protein to form a functional 
enzyme, and which can't be synthesized by the body — but 
unfortunately for that definition, some  vitamins seem to have 
functions other than as co -enzymes. This mistaken definition 
often leads to the reasoning: "There are only so many 
molecules of each enzyme; therefore a similar number of 
vitamin molecules is the maximum that can be used." First, 
the number of enzyme molecules is variable; second, 
several factors can influence the association of co -enzyme 
with (apo)enzyme, so that there may be no effective 
"binding" until the protein is surrounded by a cloud of vitamin 
molecules; and third, the vitami n's function may not involve 
an enzyme at all. The "vitamin equals co -enzyme" concept 
seems to result from "quicky" biochemistry courses, com -
bined with no study of nutrition.  
UNITS  
The labels on vitamin bottles can be misleading to 
people who don't realiz e that a milligram (mg.) is 1000 times 
bigger than a microgram (mcg.). Usually the only vitamins 
that should be listed in microgram amounts are B12, biotin, 
and folic acid. For example, 50 mcg. of pantothenic acid is 
too small to do any good; it would be a bout the right dose for 
a big bug, but I have seen it on many vitamin labels. 
Apparently these are easy units to confuse — in one of my 
nutrition classes, a woman who had been a nurse for 30 
years said she had always thought a microgram was bigger 
than a m illigram.  
The next larger common unit, the gram is easier to 
visualize: roughly a quarter of a teaspoonful, or about 1/28 of 
an ounce. One milligram is a thousandth of a gram. Some -
times the English unit, grain, is confused with the gram; a 
grain is abbreviated gr. (gram is g.) and is only about 65 
milligrams.  
110Calories (or kilocalories) are the chemical energy of 
food expressed as heat, and for many foods the figures 
given in tables are misleading. For example, many 
vegetables contain carbohydrates with a variable 
digestibleness: storage or cooking can modify the amount 
that is available, and differ ent people will absorb different 
proportions of them. The calorie values for fats (over 9 
calories per gram) and car bohydrates (about 4 ca lories 
per gram) are more consistent. Chemically, protein has 
about 5 calories per gram, but this figure isn't very 
meaningful biologically. Taking "calories" out of context 
can give bad results — some people avoid carrots as 
being "high in calories," but carrots can be very effective 
for losing weight, partly because their high fiber content 
binds a large amount of fat and carries it out of the body.  
"International units" are used for vitamins A. D, and E. 
The minimum requirements fo r these vitamins are, i n 
weight,  close to those for vitamins B1, B12, and 
pantothenic acid, respectively. In international units, the 
figures are 5000 to 8000, about 400, and 25 to 30, but 
these requirements are known to vary with factors such as 
the amount of sunshine, the seas on, and other nutrients in 
the diet.  
Vitamin A may also be expressed in the new unit, RE 
(retinol equivalent), which is 5 times as large as an IU.  
NUTRIENTS: PLANT SOURCES; PLACES  
CONCENTRATED IN ANIMALS; FUNCTIONS  
Vitamin A: leaves, carrots; eye, liver, skin; light 
sensitivity, protein synthesis, cell division regulation.  
Vitamin  K: leaves; liver; clotting, energy.  
Vitamin D:  milk products ; teeth, bones, nerves, muscles,  
clotting — mineral metabolism. 
Vitamin E:  leaves, seeds; liver, fat, brain: energy, clot 
removal, cell integrity.  
Vitamin B1:  nuts, leaves, bran; liver, cornea; oxidative 
energy metabolism.  
Niacin:  nuts, seeds; liver; energy, synthesis.  
Vitamin B6:  leaves, fruit; meat in general; synthesis, 
especially proteins and nerve chemicals.  
Biotin:  seeds, leaves; liver, oviduct; synthesis of fats 
and oils. carbon dioxide metabolism.  
Inositol:  fruit, seeds, leaves; liver; mobilizing fats, 
stabilizing molecule s and cells.  
Vitamin B12:  possibly in leaves, such as comfrey; 
pituitary gland, liver, other animal tissue; blood 
formation, nerve function, and it has been suggested for 
irregular menstrua tion and abnormal vaginal discharge.  
Pantothenic acid:  fruit, seeds; liver, glands; hormone  
111production, energy, synthesis.  
Folic acid:  leaves, nuts; liver; synthesis, especially 
nerve, blood, immune system.  
Vitamin C:  fruits; glands; connective tissue, immunity, 
detoxification, anti -cholesterol.  
Potassi um: all solid parts; intracellular: lost in stress, 
deficiency mimics diabetes.  
Sodium:  saps especiaily: extracellular: well retained, 
except when adrenals are damaged or it is taken in 
excess.  
Magnesium:  leaves, molasses; intracellular: enzyme 
control, st abilizes nerves, muscles, etc. activates immune 
system, helps regulate sugar metabolism.  
Calcium:  milk, leaves; mainly extracellular; enzyme and 
permeability control, muscle contraction, clotting. 
Phosphorous:  seeds, yeast: meat, milk, intracellular: 
growt h, energy, etc.  
Iron:  bran, molasses; blood, meat: respiration, enzymes. 
Iodine:  kelp. sea plants; all seafoods, thyroid gland; 
growth, fertility, nerve function,  oxidation.  
Copper:  soy beans; liver; mitochondrial oxidation, elastin  
production in arteries, skin, etc., possible regulatory 
function in hormone cycles.  
Zinc:  sea plants: oysters, thymus gland; immunity, wound 
healing, fertility, nerves.  
Ubiquinone:  leaves; liver, all tissues; energy production, 
muscle action, acts with vitamin E.  
Fiber:  Carrot fibers are best for intestinal stimulation and 
binding of fats: leaves and bran contain fiber that is 
slightly less effective, though the other nutrients in t hem 
are very valuable.  
Essential fatty acids : seeds, leaves; liver, pork, chicken; 
can prevent eczema; used in lecithin synthesis, and 
probably in prostaglandin  hormones; kidney function.  
HOLISTIC PHYSIOLOGY: A DIAGRAM  
The wavy line across the middle of the picture repre-
sents the "internal environment," the fluid that bathes all 
our cells, which is kept as close as possible to an 
optimum composition. Water, salts, acid -alkali balance, 
hormones, sugars and other nutrients are all regulated as 
smoothly as possible. An abnormal environment can 
disturb the balance of one substance, and if the organism 
can't replace it from t he environment or tissue stores,  
complex adjustment of many components can restore a 
reasonable balance. But the greater the demand, the 
smaller will be the reserve capacity for a future 
adaptation. Therefore, part of our "physiology" is the 
adjustment of our environment so that it more closely 
suits our needs. If our environm ent fails us a little today,  
112our needs will be much greater tomorrow. For example, 
exper iments show that if the cells of the cornea (eye 
surface) become deficient in vitamin B2, they can no longer 
pick up that vitamin from the body fluids when the animal is 
fed a normal amount of the vitamin. An extre mely high dose 
must be given before the tissue can regain its normal 
amount of the vitamin. A similar effect  has been observed 
with niacin, and it probably represents a general property of 
living material (physical systems show a similar effect. 
called hys teresis).  
This kind of effect, this "residue" from past environ -
ments, has to be considered in deciding what a person's 
nutritional requirements are. Memory and intention must be 
considered as part of physiology: evaluating the quality of 
support from the environm ent requires a long time scale, 
even "transgenerational." Transgenerational effects are 
typically ignored or denied by establishment "science": A.E. 
Needham in The Growth Process in Animals, reviews some 
of the older studies of nutritional effects extending beyond a 
single lifetime. More recently, Zamenhoff and others have 
shown transgenerational nutritional effects on the brain. 
Absolutist genetic theory — plus bad reasoning — serves to 
justify a given level of disease in the population. For 
exampl e, nutritional standards are determined with 
reference to the present level of health in the nation, 
because this is seen as being determined by factors other 
than nutrition. The na tional health has deteriorated in many 
ways over the last 30 or 40 years, and the average diet has 
changed. Official national nutritional standards have been 
revised downward over this period.  
Emphasizing the uniqueness of individual needs should 
be seen in the context of looking for the most general 
principles: this can help us  to perceive meaningful configur -
ations, making otherwise trivial things significant.  I think a 
biophysical approach to the cytoplasm is one of the "princi -
ples" that will help in perceiving patterns. Other more 
specific and immediately useful ideas include stress, the use 
of sugar efficiently or wastefully. and the energy charge of 
cells. These are explained in other sections.  
A NOTE ON REFERENCES  
At present, Nutrition for Women contains more than 80 
references to the scientific or medical literature . Since it is 
compactly written,  almost every sentence is based on at least 
one publication. Complete citations would therefore require a 
bibliography at least as  long as the present text, meaning that 
the book would cost more than twice as much. Often  I 
113have used older sources, when their results have stood up 
well, because I want to emphasize the cultural lag which 
exists between discovery and pr ofessional awareness and 
application. Unfortunately, some professional half -wits who 
have never read a scientific paper are able to point at the 
date of citation and say, "well, now we know better than this." 
This happens frequently in relation to the info rmation on 
estrogen and iron, especially, even though many studies 
have appeared in recent months confirming the older data. 
The only real solution to this problem is to change our 
system of education and information distribution. However, if 
more detailed  citations are needed for a particular problem I 
will be glad to provide them.  
 
114REFERENCES NOT GIVEN IN TEXT  
Chatterjee, S. N., et al., "Effect of intrauterine contraceptive suture on corpora lutes 
of guinea -pigs," Indian ). Exp. Biol. 9: 105, 1971.  
Dove, G. E., et al., "Oestrogenic function in postmenopausal women," I. Reprod. Fert. 
24: 18, 1971.  
Emerson, G. A. and H. M. Evans, "Restoration of fertility in successively older E -low 
female rats," ). Nutr. 18: 501, 1939.  
Frampton, J., "Increa sed oestrogen activity associated with postmenopausal 
bleeding," J. Obstet. Gyn. Br. Commonw. 73: 137, 1966.  
Gram, T. E. and I. R. Fouts, "Effect of alpha -tocopherol upon lipid 
peroxidation and drug metabolism in hepatic microsomes," Arch. Biochem. 
Biophys . 114: 331- 335, 1966.  
Gyorgy, P., and C. S. Rose, "Tocopherol and hemolysis in vivo and in vitro," Ann. N. Y. 
Acad. Sci. 52: 231, 1949.  
Pous, D. L. and I. Comas, "La insuficiencia progestacional del endometrio," Proc. 3rd 
World Congr. Fert. Ster. (Amsterda m): 593 -595, 1959.  
Sanchez, A., et al., "Role of sugars in human neutrophilic phagocytosis," Am. J. Clin. 
Nutr. 26, 1180, 1973.  
J. S. Turner, The Chemical Feast, Grossman, N. Y. 1970. 
Vitale, J.J., et al., (mitochondria and magnesium), J. Biol. Chem 228, 573, 1957.  
Schwarz, K., "Dietetic hepatic injuries and the mode of action of tocopherol," Ann. N. 
Y. Acad. Sci. 52: 225, 1949.  
Song, C. S. and A. Kappas, "The influence of estrogens, progestins, and 
pregnancy on the liver," Vitamins and Hormones 26: 147, 1968.  
Yokota, K. and Yamazaki, "Reaction of peroxidase with reduced nicotinamide -
adenine dinucleotide and reduced nicotinamide -adenine dinucleotide phos -
phate," Biochim. Biophys. Acta 105: 301 -312, 1965.  
"Immune deficiency in malnutrition," Nutrition Revie ws 33(11), 334, 1975. 
"New Evidence favors breast -feeding," Med. World News 16(13), 26, 1975. 
"Thymic function in malnutrition," Nutrition Reviews 32(6), 100, 1974.  
"Ascorbic acid and the catabolism of cholesterol," Nutrition Reviews 31(5), 154, 
1973.  
"The growth of children given stimulant drugs," Nutrition Reviews 31(3), 91, 
1973.  
"Riboflavin and adrenal cortex," Nutrition Reviews 31(3), 95, 1973.  
"Maternal dietary supplementation and infant birth weight," Nutrition Reviews 31(2), 
45, 1973.  
"Oral contraceptives and vitamin B 6," Nutrition Reviews 31(2), 49, 1973. "Brain 
biochemistry and intrauterine growth," Nutrition Reviews 31(1), 16, 1973.  
115CHRONIC FATIGUE  
Various researchers have found that the cells of 
fat, or depressed, or tired people are in a low energy state, 
and, increasingly, it is being recognized that this low 
energy state resembles hypothyroidism. Many things can 
cause hypothyroidism --too much estrogen or cortisol, too 
little progesterone, a diet containing too little good  quality 
protein, too few calories, or diets containing significant 
quantities of beans, lentils, or undercooked broccoli or 
cauliflower —but in our culture unsaturated oils are 
probably the most important cause.  
As early as 1951, it was known (Kunkel and 
Williams, J. Biol. Chem.) that the polyunsaturated fatty 
acids strongly inhibit the crucial respiratory enzyme, 
cytochrome oxidase, and that inhibition of this enzyme has 
a very important effect on the whole animal, suppressing its 
metabolic rate, reducing the number of calories it can burn. 
It is now known that polyunsaturated fats interfere with 
thyroid hormone in just about every conceivable way.  
One of the most common symptoms of 
hypothyroidism is lethargy, fatigue that persists even while 
getting extra rest and sleep. Everything is inefficient in 
hypothyroidism, even sleep. Occasionally, a low thyroid 
person can compensate for the basic metabolic defect by 
producing very large amounts of adrenalin. These people 
seem to have excess energy, and sometimes n eed less sleep 
than average, but on the level of tissue function, they are 
similar to the chronically fatigued people, being slow to 
produce energy. Compensating for low thyroid with high 
adrenalin creates specific metabolic problems, including 
circulatory  and heart disease. Slow relaxation of muscles, 
caused by respiratory inhibition, can produce chronic 
soreness and stiffness, which is a common feature of the 
"chronic fatigue syndrome."  
116Cold fingers and toes are one of the most common 
signs of hypothyroidism, and result from a low rate of 
metabolic heat production, combined with the effects of 
adrenalin, restricting blood flow to the extremities to 
preserve the body's limited heat. Experimenters have found 
that sodium tends to increase body t emperature, and eating 
additional salt sometimes helps to break out of the low 
energy hypothyroid state; one effect of extra salt is that it 
makes it easier for the body to retain its magnesium, which 
is very closely associated with cellular energy.  
All an imals respond to the stressful effects of 
reduced sunshine in winter with adjustments in their 
thyroid functions. Typically, mammals need several times 
as much thyroid during the winter as they do in the 
summer. If a person is taking a balanced thyroid 
supplement, increasing the dose is often all it takes to 
avoid the lethargy, weight gain, and "seasonal affective 
disorder" that often occurs in the winter. A variety of 
stress -related diseases tend to get worse during the winter, 
and sometimes they make thei r first appearance in the 
winter. The rate of aging is greatest in the winter, and the 
risk of death is highest. All of the protective hormones 
tend to fall during the winter.  
On pages 119 and 120, I have added two new 
charts that schematically show the re lation of thyroid 
hormones and other factors to the protective and youth -
associated steroid hormones.  
PREGNENOLONE  
Pregnenolone is the first steroid produced from 
cholesterol, under the influence of thyroid and vitamin A. 
Large amounts are produced in the brain, by certain glial 
cells that are one of our essential anti -stress systems. The 
need for producing pregnenolon e is associated with a  
117sense  of being under stress, and taking a supplement of 
pregnenolone causes many fatigued, stressed people to have a 
renewed sense of ability to meet challenges. Ordinarily, 
thyroid hormone supplementation has the same effect by 
promoting the conversion of chol esterol to pregnenolone, but 
when there isn't enough cholesterol, or when the 
mitochondria have accumulated damage (such as might be 
produced by tissue accumulation of iron, displacing copper), 
pregnenolone itself seems to be needed. For many years, I 
have  felt that the skin might be one of our most important 
endocrine organs, and it has been demonstrated that it is able 
metabolize various steroids. I suspect that pregnenolone is as 
important to the skin as it is to the brain. Several years ago, I 
noticed t hat my facial skin, that had gradually seemed to 
loosen with aging, suddenly contracted back to a snugger, 
more elastic fit shortly after I started taking a small amount of 
pregnenolone. Since then, I have seen the same thing happen 
in other people; one ma n said it was like an over -night face 
lift, when he took a large amount, that also had a profound 
effect on his mood. A few years ago, the fiber cells, which are 
a major component of the skin, were found to contain the 
same contractile materials that muscl es have. I think 
pregnenolone allows these cells to contract, restoring 
firmness to slack skin. Pregnenolone can quickly cause other 
very rapid "anatomical" changes, though, that seem to have 
more to do with eliminating edema, than with contraction of 
cells, such as causing protruding eyes (in Graves' disease) to 
recede, or causing joint cartilage to function normally and 
painlessly, or causing lungs to oxygenate the blood efficiently 
in people with emphysema. The charts on the following pages 
show some of the factors involved in the formation of 
pregnenolone.  
118 
Structural integrity of the mitochondria is essential for functional 
respiration and steroid synthesis. Coconut oil, thyroid hormone, 
pregnenolone, and progesterone stabilize mitochondr ial structure.  
119ISOPRENE  (Precursor, shows up in nocturnal breath,  
probably indicating interference with its use.)  
CHOLESTEROL  (Vitamin  A, thyroid, and mitochondria 
integrity, which depe nd on factors that limit lipid 
peroxidation, are needed for its conversion into  
pregnenolone.)  
PREGNENOLONE  (Formed in mitochondria, probably  
exits from that structure by a solubility gradient as well as  
specific mechanisms, to the cytoplasm, where  
tissue -specific enzymes in microsomes oxidize it further t o  
either:)  
DHEA or PROGESTERONE  (These and pregnenolone  
should be abundant, probably satu rating cells to  the 
solubility limit)   
ESTROGEN, TESTOSTERONE, CORTISOL, AND  
ALDOSTERONE  (These are the "terminal" steroids,  
which vary greatly according to circ umstances; in excess  
they are toxic, and in the absence of saturating amounts of  
the precursor steroids --which are slightly antagonistic  
"buffers" --even normal amounts can have exaggerated  
effects.)  
The accumulation of cholesterol clearly indicates the  
failure to convert it to steroids, so elevated cholesterol is a 
fairly reliable diagnostic indicator of hypothyroidism. The 
appearance of isoprene in some people's breath during the 
night is probably an indicator of something interfering 
with the synthesi s of cholesterol. Highly allergic people 
often have extremely low cholesterol, making it 
impossible for them to synthesis normal amounts of the 
protective steroids.  
120INFORMATION ON SERVICES  
CONSULTATIONS:  
Personal consultations by telephone.  Appointments may 
be made by calling (503) 345 -9855, or writing to the 
address below.  
BOOKS & PRICES:  
Nutrition for Women:  $10.00 plus $1.50 postage.  
Progesterone in Orthomolecular Medicine:  $3.00 plus 
$1 postage.  
Generative Energy:   $8.00 plus $1.50 postage.  
NEWSLETTER:  
These contain information on hormones and also report 
generally interesting research in health,  science, and issues 
of develop mental and evolutionary significance.  
12 issue subscription to Ray Peat's Newsletter, $24.  
PRODUCTS:  
For information on other products, or to order the items 
listed above, contact:  
Kenogen, 
P.O. Box 5764, Eugene, OR 97405 
(503) 345- 9855  
121