 
Oral Absorption of Progesterone
 by Ray Peat, Ph.D. Since many synthetic progestins are known to be luteolytic, 1 while progesterone itself exerts a positive feedback influence on steroidogenic tissue, 2 it is clear that it would be useful to have an effective way to administer progesterone orally. It is well known that fat soluble substances are absorbed primarily by way of the lymphatic system, entering the general circulation drectly rather than passing first through the liver. Progesterone is extremely insoluble in water, but it is soluble in lipids. If the solution is stable, it seems clear that the progesterone will be preferentially absorbed by the lymphatic route. I have investigated the oral use of progesterone in tocopherol, a non-toxic stable solvent, In cycling women with a luteal phase deficiency, and in post-menopausal women. In younger women who are still producing iarge amounts of estrogen, a therapeuticaliy effective oral dose of 50 mg, to 200 mg, daily (during the luteal phase of their cycle), was found to prevent the symptoms associated with the premenstrual decrease in serum progesterone. which had been observed in previous cycles. In some women the effective dose caused the blood levels to rise somewhat above the levels usually considered normal for the luteal phase. Post-menopausal women, who have much lower average levels of estrogen and who produce little progesterone, show much more clearly the effects of administered progesterone. Seven women who had gone through "natural" menopause at least two years previously and whose serum progesterone was either below the sensitivity limit of the competitive protein binding technique, or in the typically low postmenopausal range of measurement by radioimmunoassay, were given oral doses of 50 mg. or 100 mg, of progesterone in tocopherol. The earliest any blood was drawn, after an oral dose of progesterone, was 20 minutes; in this case, the progesterone had risen from 0.2 ng/ml before, to 0.7 ng/ml with a dose of 100 mg. When blood was drawn from 4 to 8 hours after an oral dose of 50 mg, to 100 mg, the blood levels were between 6 and 16 ng/ml. No attempt was made to assure that the progesterone was taken on an empty stomach, and meals were eaten as usual while waiting for blood to be drawn. The progesterone was administered by their regular physicians, and the measurement was done by commercial medical laboratories. In two cases in which blood was drawn 24 hours after a single dose of 100 mg, the progesterone level was still in the normal luteal phase range. Since the observations were made over a period of several years, with progesterone measurements made at several different laboratories and by different techniques, the numbers aren't strictly comparable. We recently got a clearer picture of the rate of absorption in a fasting person. A middle-aged man, with a fasting level of 0.2, took 100 mg. At the first hour, the level was already 7.0 ng/ml; the concentration rose each hour to a peak at the sixth hour of 14.0 ng/ml, and the last observation, at the seventh hour, was 7.0 ng/ml. On average, men's livers are quicker to remove substances from the blood, and the fact that no food was taken during the test very likely caused the rate of increase and the rate of decrease to be greater than in a non-fasting person. References 1. Badawy, S.Z. A., and L. Marshall. Luteal phase inadequacy and infertility. Family Practice, 1981;6:17A-24A. 2. Rothchild, I. The regulation of the mammalian corpus Simmonds, W. Absorption of lipids. In Gastrointestinal 3. Physiology (E. D. Jacobson, Editor), page 343. Ray Peat, Ph.D. Ray Peat's Newsletter P.O. Box 3427 Eugene, OR 97403   Telephone (201) 583-7773 
DIAGNOSTICS, Inc
 ROUTE 35 & INDUSTRIAL DRIVE ● CLIFFWOOD BEACH, NEW JERSEY07735 CONSULTANTS: Drs. H. Baker, O. Frank, S.H. Hutner 
OUR ONLY BUSINESS IS VITAMIN DETECTION
 WHAT WE DO: Using micro-animals (protozoa) we can now offer you the most accurate, sensitive and specific methods for vitamin detection in biologic fluids, tissues, and vitamin-containing products. These methods serve as standards in the field of Clinical Vitaminology, and have been validated by over 30 years of clinical investigations. They have appeared in peer reviewed journals and are accepted by authorities as the diagnostic methods of choice for Medical Quality Assurance and scientific support. Studies show protozoan methods are superior to functional analyses for uncovering hidden and overt vitamin deficits and for monitoring nutritional treatment regimens to determine their clinical efficacy. TOTAL VITAMIN PANEL:   Thiamin, Biotin, Folates, B 12 , B 6 , Riboflavin, Nicotinates, Pantothenates, Vitamin A, C. E, and Carotenes (Pro-Vitamin A). Tests for free and total choline, biopterin, inositol, and carnitine are also available. REQUIREMENTS: Five lavender stoppered EDTA containing vacuum blood collection tubes (7 ml size) for a TOTAL VITAMIN PANEL. One tube is needed for a single vitamin determination. TOTAL 12 VITAMIN PANEL: $120, SINGLE VITAMIN TEST: $15. Price does not include CHARGE: physician's costs. PHYSICIAN:  Just draw blood and mail to us in a crush-proof container with payment. CALL OR WRITE FOR BROCHURE, ADDITIONAL INFORMATION, AND PUBLISHED PAPERS