 
More Letters, g
 
Progesterone Content Corrected
 Editor: Burton Goldberg's article on fibroids (January, 2000) on page 90 indicates that Aeron LifeCycles lab reported the progesterone content of Progest-E Complex as being between 1,000 and 1,500 mg. per ounce. I was told a couple of years ago that this figure was mistakenly introduced into John Lee's book by the book's editors. That product, made under my patent, has never deviated from its 10% progesterone content, so it contains 2,850 mg of progesterone per ounce, and I don't know of any test that has found otherwise. As I understand it, Dr. Lee's book was later corrected. Raymond Peat P.O. Box 5764 Eugene, Oregon 98405 USA Email: raypeat@efn.org 
Evidence Links Viruses and Bacteria to Gallstones
 
Editor:
 I read with interest your excellent publication and would like to comment on the article "Mounting Evidence Links Viruses and Bacteria to Everything from Cancer to Gallstones" in October 1999 issue (page 39). I forward an article from my health information course which your readers may find interesting. Any references to it being a course article could be omitted as it makes a free standing item also. The toxic state of tissue is of primary importance whether in cancer or gall stones (two items mentioned in article heading). Without dehydration, gall stones cannot form and I believe that the common factors in all chronic ill health are dehydration, toxicity and chemical (nutritional) imbalance. Bacterial clean-up is a result, not a cause, of such a dry, toxic and nutrientimbalanced state. Of course, individual constitution and toxic/nutritional history make necessary the evaluation of each person on an individual basis. I find the author's comments most interesting and if these are seen in the light of being the result and not cause of illness, this work would complement works of people like Bechamp, Lida Mattman and many others who also identify microbes at the site of "tissue activity." The herbs he mentioned are most interesting and beneficial in that they aid tissue detoxification and immune capacity and therefore enhance and sssees the tasks of 'pathogenic' microbes. I agree also, that the quality of herb is of vital importance. The philosophies of Pasteur versus Bechamp are a most important fundamental foundation in thinking upon which to place the evidence of what we find. In short, Pasteur believed that microbes are from external sources, unrelated to tissue state and need a solution from without (i.e. drugs - the basis of the pharmaceutical industry). Bechamp believed and proved that microbes originated from within, when the climate was toxic, and reverted to non-pathogenic microbes when tissue returned to health. This philosophy is the basis for health and responsibility. Pasteur renounced his beliefs and agreed with Bechamp on his death bed, but that is not commonly known nor reported. Bechamp for some strange reason, despite his impressive titles and works, has been larely ignored and deleted from records where he should hve been found. Some may ask how the Australian Barry (?sorry cannot recall his surname) 'infected' himself with H. pylori when he was identifying its asociation with stomach ulcers. In my experience the stomach lining is badly affected by chronic dehydration and mercury poisoning from fillings. I wonder what this experiment would have produced in a non-toxic (realistically in the 1990's low-toxic), well hydrated individual. Sorry Barry - not being personal - only discussing the parameters of possibilities. How do children pick up 'infection' from peers if there is no contagion? Well, there is an opportunity to 'catch detoxification agents' if relevant to your tissue. Resonance is the key. Why do only certain office staff 'catch' the cold going around? Why not everyone? Resistance is the usual understanding but examining resistance brings one back to the terrain theory of Bechamp. Also, how can some have "TB' of the lung in the absence of the tuberculus bacillus? If we are going to keep to the laws of good science then 'contagion laws' apply to all. Alas, health for all would topple society as we know it. The food industries, banking and finance systems, petro-chemical industry, pharmaceutical industry and indeed, government revenue etc. all rely on the premise of Pasteur. The sickness industry, massive and international, is nothing to do with health. I am certainly not against society etc. and the sickness industry offers the only help some will accept - I am not pointing fingers or involved in criticism, but simply state that the choice for health is individual and cannot be truly. made unless based on the necessary information (Informed Choice). There are many who do not choose health and that is their prerogative. Information is plentiful but putting it together in context to get a clear picture is not easy. Your publication serves as an excellent forum in this respect, r Vivienne Bradshaw, MRNT Practitioner (Alt/Nat. Med) 3 Maitings Cottages, Gonerby Hill Foot Grantham, Lines. NG31 8JF England. Phone/Fax 01476-567420 ... 
Detoxification and Its Erroneous Label of 'Infection' V. Bradshaw 1996©
 In my experience of helping people to resolve their health problems, I have encountered various attitudes to getting well. Some desperately want rid of their symptoms but only if they do not have to be involved - they seek the magic bullet from without. I am usually unable to help a person with this approach. Others are prepared to do some things which do not inconvenience them too much. These people may receive some help. There are others who really do want to get well, are prepared to take back the responsibility for their own health and see their symptoms as no longer necessary as they implement changes - some of them quite drastic ones. These people embark upon a 106 TOWNSEND LETTER for DOCTORS & PATIENTS – JUNE 2000