 United States Patent  [19] Peat [54] PHARMACEUTICAL COMPOSITIONS CONTAINING DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE AND OTHER ANESTHETIC STEROIDS IN THE TREATMENT OF ARTHRITIS AND OTHER JOINT DISABILITIES [76] Raymond F. Peat, P.O. Box 3427, Inventor: Eugene, Oreg. 97403 [21] Appl. No.: 738,482 [22] Filed: May 28, 1985 [51] [52] Int. Cl. 4 . U.S. Cl.   Field of Search  [58] References Cited [56] U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS Jasionowski  4/1979 4,150,128 9/1980 Marcadet . 4,224,319 1/1982 Caruso et al.  4,312,866 Scheinberg . 4,315,028 2/1982 3/1982 Schulthess et al.  4,322,405 4,337,334 6/1982 Jensen et al. ........................... 424/322 Cullen et al.  4,344,946 8/1982 4,355,029 10/1982 Ridolfo  [11] Patent Number: 4,628,052 [45] Date of Patent: Dec. 9, 1986 4,375,468 3/1983 Dunn  6/1983 Lysaght  4,387,093 Welter et al.  8/1983 4,397,858 Wyburn-Mason . 4,402,965 9/1983 4,409,243 10/1983 Lieb . Okazaki et al. ...................... 424/250 4,420,481 12/1983 439,432 3/1984 Peat  OTHER PUBLICATIONS Merck Index, 9th Edition (1976), published by Merck & Co. Inc., p. 1181. Primary Examiner-Elbert L. Roberts Attorney, Agent, or Firm-Ellen P. Winner [57] 
ABSTRACT
 The present invention is concerned with compositions and methods of treating rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, and arthritis associated with psoriasis and with lupus and other auto-immune diseases, and also for treating non-specific joint pain associated with stress or incidental to another ailment, using dehydroepiandrosterone and/or other anesthetic steroids dissolved in an oily vehicle, and preferably administered topically or orally. 15 Claims, No Drawings 
PHARMACEUTICAL COMPOSITIONS CONTAINING DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE AND OTHER ANESTHETIC STEROIDS IN THE TREATMENT OF ARTHRITIS AND OTHER JOINT DISABILITIES
  
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
 This invention is concerned with compositions and methods of treating rheumatoid arthritis, osteo-arthritis, and arthritis associated with psoriasis and with lupus and other auto-immune diseases, and also for treating non-specific joint pain associated with stress or incidental to another ailment, using dehydroepiandrosterone 15 (DHEA) and/or other anesthetic steroids dissolved in an oily vehicle, and preferably administered topically or orally. The extensive use of cortisone and related anti-inflammatory steroids in treating arthritis has been limited 20 by the knowledge of several side effects, including calcium loss and osteoporosis, immune suppression, and atrophy of various tissues, including the adrenal glands. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents have been used with some success to avoid the glucocorticoids' side 25 effects, but generally are ineffective in preventing the advance of the disease process. Other agents have been used or proposed which retard the advance of the disease, possibly by inhibiting mitosis, but they generally have toxic side effects. It would be desirable to use in treatment substances which are normally present in the body at high levels, since these normal substances, especially when used in physiological quantities, rarely have harmful side effects. 135 The improvement which sometimes occurs during pregnancy in women suffering from arthritis has led to are steroids of the above-depicted structure having H, the experimental use of some of the hormones of pregmethyl, fluorine, or chlorine substituents, as well as nancy in treating arthritis, but the female sex hormones easily hydrolyzable esters of all the foregoing. would obviously produce side effects when used in 40 Suitable pharmaceutical compositions for use according to this invention comprise at least one of the above large doses in males. Some steroidal substances, however, lack convendescribed compounds, together with suitable pharmational hormonal activity and are normally present in ceutical carriers and/or diluents, preferably the carriers specified in the preferred embodiments described besignificant amounts in both males and females. A number of such steroids, e.g. dehydroepiandrosterone, are 45 low. In such pharmaceutical compositions, the proporpresent in elevated quantities during pregnancy. Such tion of therapeutically active to carrier substance can vary between about 1% and about 99% by weight. The steroids have received little attention since they have been considered to be only chemical intermediates or compositions can be prepared in various pharmaceutical forms, such as granules, tablets, pills, suppositories, end products destined for nothing more important than to be excreted. It was therefore surprising to find that a 50 capsules, suspensions, salves, lotions, and the like. Pharnumber of these substances are useful in the treatment of maceutical organic or inorganic carriers and/or diluents suitable for oral and topical use can be used to make up arthritis and related diseases. compositions containing the therapeutically active It is an object of this invention to provide an anti-incompounds. Diluents known to the art include vegetaflammatory pharmaceutical preparation useful for the ble and animal oils and fats. Stabilizing agents, wetting treatment of arthritis and lacking undesirable hormonal 55 side effects. It is a further object of this invention to and emulsifying agents, salts for varying the osmotic pressure or buffers for securing an adequate pH value, provide such a pharmaceutical preparation in a form and skin penetration enhancers can be used as auxiliary suitable for administration locally to the affected joints without requiring injection. agents. The compositions may further contain other 60 therapeutically active compounds, e.g. selected from 
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
 The present invention is concerned with compositions and methods of treating rheumatoid arthritis, osteo-arthritis, and arthritis associated with psoriasis and with lupus and other auto-immune diseases, and 65 also for treating non-specific joint pain associated with stress or incidental to another ailment, using dehydroepiandrosterone and/or other anesthetic steroids dis solved in an oily vehicle, and preferably administered topically or orally. 
DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENTS
 Arthritis, including rheumatoid arthritis, osteo-arthritis and arthritis associated with psoriasis and with lupus, as well as other auto-immune diseases, and non-specific joint pain associated with stress or incidental to another ailment, may be successfully treated by administering to a subject in need of such treatment, including a human patient, an effective amount of an anesthetic steroid, preferably a natural anesthetic steroid having 19 or 21 carbons, more preferably selected from compounds of the formula:    25 wherein R1 is O or OH and R2 is O, OH, or COCH3; and which may contain one double bond in ring A and/or ring B. Examples of such compounds are dehydroepiandros30 terone (DHEA), iso-androsterone, etiocholanolone, progesterone, and pregnenolone. Combinations of such steroids may be used. When the patient being treated is male, combinations containing testosterone are preferably used. Compounds considered to be equivalent to the fore135 going and also falling within the scope of this invention are steroids of the above-depicted structure having H, methyl, fluorine, or chlorine substituents, as well as easily hydrolyzable esters of all the foregoing. Suitable pharmaceutical compositions for use according to this invention comprise at least one of the above described compounds, together with suitable pharmaceutical carriers and/or diluents, preferably the carriers specified in the preferred embodiments described below. In such pharmaceutical compositions, the proportion of therapeutically active to carrier substance can vary between about 1% and about 99% by weight. The compositions can be prepared in various pharmaceutical forms, such as granules, tablets, pills, suppositories, maceutical organic or inorganic carriers and/or diluents suitable for oral and topical use can be used to make up compositions containing the therapeutically active compounds. Diluents known to the art include vegetable and animal oils and fats. Stabilizing agents, wetting and emulsifying agents, salts for varying the osmotic pressure or buffers for securing an adequate pH value, and skin penetration enhancers can be used as auxiliary agents. The compositions may further contain other 60 therapeutically active compounds, e.g. selected from the group of drugs commonly used in the treatment of arthritis. For oral use, the pharmaceutical composition of the invention appropriately contains from about 10% to about 100% by weight of the active material. For topical use, the composition appropriately contains from about 1% to about 15% by weight of the active material. within an hour. He has remained free of symptoms for Generally for oral use it is preferred that the active eight months with continued treatment. ingredients in dry form be mixed with tocopherol to form a paste for capsuling. For topical use, solubilizaCase 2. A 72 year old woman. She was considered to have mild rheumatoid arthritis which was degenerating tion in tocopherol and olive oil is preferred. into osteo-arthritis, with her fingers being the most A preferred composition for oral use comprises about seriously affected joints. A 3% solution of dehydro10 mg of the active material, preferably DHEA, about epiandrosterone in olive oil was applied to one index 50 mg pregenolone, about 5 mg. progesterone in 1200 finger, and a 10% solution of progesterone in mixed mg tocopherol. tocopherols was applied to the other index finger. All of A preferred composition for topical use comprises 10 her fingers had been rigid for over a year, with the 5% of the active material, preferably DHEA, 80% result that she was extremely disabled. Forty minutes mixed tocopherols, and optimally up to 10% olive oil after the dehydroepiandrosterone solution had been and up to 3% progesterone. Testosterone up to about applied, the finger treated with the composition con0.5% may also be added. taining dehydroepiandrosterone could be bent enough The dosage required may vary from about 10 mg to to touch the base of her thumb, without significant pain, 15 about 200 mg active material orally, or 400 mg to 1000 but none of her other fingers showed any improvement. mg active material topically, and may be repeated 2 Several days later, the dehydroepiandrosterone solution times per day. was applied to all of her fingers, with similar good reGenerally, for oral administration, a single dosage of sults. After about 6 months, stiffness and pain returned about 10 to 50 mg of therapeutically active compound 20 in spite of use of DHEA, and progesterone added to the in an appropriate carrier is effective. For topical use, a treatment caused continued improvement. preparation containing about 8% of therapeutically Case 3. A 60 year old woman with a long history of active compound should be spread in a single applicarheumatoid arthritis and with serious degeneration of tion on the skin over the painful area in an amount of many joints. She had undergone surgery several times, between about 0.05 ml and about 0.2 ml per square inch for implantation of two artificial joints and for repair of 225 of skin. The preparation should be thoroughly rubbed joint cartilage. She walked as little as possible, and in, and the area covered to avoid rubbing away of the experienced pain, inflammation and fatigue from excescompound before absorption. Warmth may be applied sive walking. She applied a solution containing 7% locally to speed absorption. dehydroepiandrosterone and 3% progesterone in solThe invention will be further described in the follow30 vent consisting of tocopherol, 90%, and olive oil, 10%. ing examples which are not to be construed as limiting She applied the solution several times one afternoon and the invention. the next morning to all affected joints, including hands, wrists, elbows, knees, and ankles. She experienced what EXAMPLE 1 she said was complete relief, and spent the next two Combined were 100 mg of micropulverized pregnen- 35 days walking around the town sightseeing, without any olone with 100 mg of 10% DHEA in tocopherol to of the after-effects she had previously experienced from form a paste which was capsuled for oral use. walking. Case 4. A 61 year old man with mild, unclassified EXAMPLE 2 arthritis of the thumb and fingers of his right hand, For oral use, 100 mg. of micropulverized pregneno40 which prevented him from playing golf, but was otherlone was combined with 50 mg of 10% DHEA and 50 wise not seriously disabling. A solution essentially idenmg of 10% progesterone to form a paste which was tical to that used in Case 3 was rubbed into the painful capsuled. joints. In less than fifteen minutes he said that all the pain was gone, even with pressure and movement. EXAMPLE 3 Case 5. A 62 year old man. His knees had been stiff, 45 For topical use, a mixture containing 72% tocophpainful, and inflamed for over two years, following an erol, 20% olive oil, 5% DHEA, 2.85% progesterone, accidental fall onto his knees. Arthroscopic examination and 0.150 testosterone was prepared by stirring the revealed damaged cartilage in his right knee, and sursteroids into the tocopherol until dissolved, then adding gery was recommended to restore function. The patient the olive oil. 50 refused surgery, even though he walked with difficulty and had to use his left leg, which was also affected, to EXAMPLE 4 lift himself slowly up steps. He said he had not slept The following case histories illustrate the effectivewell since he had developed the arthritis, because the ness of the compositions of this invention in treating pain woke him repeatedly during the night, and only the arthritis and joint pain: use of an analgesic would allow him to go back to sleep. 55 Case 1. A 78 year old man. He was considered to He coated his knees and the skin above and below the have mild osteo-arthritis, mainly in his knees. For a few knees to a distance of about four inches from the knee, years he had found it increasingly difficult and painful with a total of 20 milliliters of a solution essentially to rise after sitting and to walk. He coated each knee identical to that used in Case 3. Within 30 minutes he and the immediately adjoining area with a solution 60 appeared to be able to walk more normally, and about containing 2.5% dehydroepiandrosterone and 2.5% 45 minutes after applying the solution he remarked that progesterone in a solvent consisting of equal amounts of he believed he was able to walk more easily. He remixed tocopherols and olive oil, and remained sitting peated the application that night before going to sleep. for two hours. He rose easily, walked without pain, and Around 10 o'clock the next morning he returned and his knees remained comfortable without another appli- 65 laughingly demonstrated his knees by running up the cation of the solution. A week later he applied a 3% stairs, and said that he had been able to sleep through the night for the first time in years, and had not taken his solution of dehydroepiandrosterone to his hands, and reported elimination of pain and increased flexibility usual analgesic. Topical treatment was discontinued 5. The method of claim 2 wherein the compound is after a few days, and he remained free of symptoms administered topically. while taking 60 mg of pregnenalone orally, daily. 6. The method of claim 2, wherein the arthritis to be Case 6. A 61 year old woman. Painful and stiff joints treated is osteo-arthritis. in her hands had interfered with her work as a musician, 7. The method of claim 2, wherein the arthritis to be and had made it impossible to sleep through the night, treated is rheumatoid arthritis. since the pain woke her two or three times during the 8. The method of claim 2, wherein the arthritis to be night. A solution essentially identical to that used in Case 3 was applied to the painful joints early in the treated is arthritis associated with auto-immune disease. 9. The method of claim 2, wherein the condition to be evening, and a few hours later she was able to go to sleep without taking analgesic and slept through the 10 treated comprises non-specific joint pain or joint disability resulting from stress. night. She occasionally uses the same solution preven10. A pharmaceutical composition useful for the tively, and has not had a recurrence of the joint pain or treatment of arthritis comprising an effective amount of stiffness. at least one compound selected from the group consistWhat is claimed is: What is claimed is: 1. A method for treating arthritis and joint pain and 15 ing of the formula: disability, comprising administering to a patient in need of such treatment a pharmacologically effective dose of dehydroepiandrosterone. 2. A method for treating arthritis, comprising administering to a patient in need of such treatment a pharma- 20 cologically effective dose of at least one compound selected from the group of the anesthetic class of natuA rally occurring steroids of the formula: CH3 CH3 44 15.6 R1 1 25 wherein Rj is O or OH and R2 is O, OH, or COCH3; and which may contain one double bond in ring A and/or 35 erol. ring B. 3. The method of claim 2 in which said steroid is selected from the group consisting of: dehydroepiandrosterone, iso-androsterone, etiocholanolone, pregnenolone, and progesterone. 40 oil. 4. The method of claim 2 wherein the compound is administered orally. CH3 CH3 R1 R1 1 25 wherein R1 is O or OH and R2 is O, or OH; and which may contain one double bond in ring A and/or ring B and tocopherol, in a suitable pharmaceutical carrier. 1. The composition of claim 10 in which said steroid 30 is selected from the group consisting of dehydroepiandrosterone, iso-androsterone, and etiochlolanolone, in a suitable pharmaceutical carrier. 12. The composition of claim 11 comprising an effective amount of dehydroepiandrosterone and tocoph13. The composition of claim 11 also comprising progesterone. 14. The composition of claim 11 also comprising testosterone. 15. The composition of claim 11 also comprising olive oil. 45 550 55 60 65