United States Patent (19) 
 Peat 
 (54) 
 76) 
 21 
 22 
 (51) (52) (58) TREATMENT OF PROGESTERONE DEFICIENCY AND RELATED CONDITIONS 
 WTH A STABLE COMPOSITION OF 
 PROGESTERONE AND TOCOPHEROLS 
 Inventor: Raymond F. Peat, 300 N. Jefferson St., Eugene, Oreg. 974.02 
 Appl. No.: 360,587 
 Filed: Mar. 22, 1982 
 Int. Cl'........................................... ... A61 K 3/56 (11) 4,439,432 
 (45) Mar. 27, 1984 
 (56) References Cited 
 PUBLICATIONS 
 Chemical Abstracts (1974), vol. 80, Par. 124760u. 
 Primary Examiner-Elbert L. Roberts Attorney, Agent, or Firn-Ellen P. Winner 
 57 ABSTRACT 
 This invention relates to the composition of a biologi cally compatible high concentration solution of proges 
 terone, which is stable and non-toxic, and which can be used transdermally, orally, and in suppository and pes sary form for the correction of progesterone deficiency 
 states and other diseases. 
 10 Claims, No Drawings   4,439,432 1. 
 TREATMENT OF PROGESTERONE DEFICIENCY 
 AND RELATED CONDITIONS WITH A STABLE COMPOSITION OF PROGESTERONE AND 
 TOCOPHEROLS 
 The present invention relates to the composition of a biologically compatible high concentration solution of progesterone in tocopherol, with or without modifying 
 substances, which can be used transdermally, orally, and in suppository and pessary form, for the correction of progesterone deficiency states and other diseases. Progesterone deficiency can be defined in relation to 
 a norm, and also in relative terms, taking into account the absolute level of progesterone in the tissues and the presence and levels of antagonists to its actions, includ ing estrogens, prolactin, and androgenic steroids, and it can also be defined in the empirical sense, in which symptoms abate when progesterone is administered. Physicians have long-sought an oral and/or trans dermal form of progesterone which is stable in high concentration and which is assimilated easily by the body, for use when injectable forms of progesterone are not tolerated. A non-toxic and low-allergenic form is of special value for use in allergic patients, and for all users 
 the absence of a toxic solvent is of obvious value. Many physicians have used progesterone dissolved in ethanol, but ethanol has a higher mutual solubility with water than with progesterone, causing the bulk of the progesterone to be crystallized out of solution as the 
 alcohol solvent mixes with biological fluids. That com position is ineffective because it fails to deliver proges terone in practical quantities and usable form. Other compositions containing solvents such as benzyl benzo ate, benzoyl alcohol or phenol are limited in their appli cability because of their toxicity, irritating properties, or allergenicity. Since allergies are common in the condi tion of progesterone deficiency, it follows that the effec tiveness of compositions containing allergenic solvents 
 is limited. 
 Progesterone has been used medically to treat preg nancy complications, menstrual abnormalities, meno pausal difficulties, several types of malignant and non malignant tumors, neurological and psychological symptoms, and many other specific problems. The com position described in this patent can be used effectively for all of the purposes for which progesterone in its older compositions is effective. In addition, the compo sition described in this patent is useful for several new purposes, including treatment of psoriasis, eczema, se nile skin changes including warts, superficial burns, allergies, abnormal hair growth resulting from andro 
 gen excess, intestinal inflammation and bowel spasms, migraine, and for promoting maturation of thymus derived lymphocytes, and as a contraceptive. 
 It is an object of the present invention to provide a composition and method for the treatment of progester one deficiency conditions. 
 It is another object of the present invention to pror vide such a composition and method which overcome the shortcomings of the prior art. It is another object of the present invention to pro vide a composition which does not decompose into solvent and crystallized solute, progesterone, under any presently known conditions of storage or use. It is another object of the present invention to pro vide such a composition which is non-toxic and which 10 
 15 
 20 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 65 2 may be used frequently over long periods without ad versely affecting the tissues which it contacts. It is a further object of the present invention to pro vide such a composition which is economical and easily used for the prevention and treatment of progesterone deficiency conditions and other diseases. . . Still further objects and the entire scope of applicabil ity of the present invention will become apparent from the detailed description and specific examples, but it should be understood that the examples, while indicat ing preferred embodiments of the invention, are given only for illustration, since changes within the spirit and scope of the invention will become apparent to those skilled in the art from this description. . It has been found that the above objects may be at tained by a composition which contains as essential ingredients progesterone and tocopherol. As will be hereinafter explained more fully, the composition may also contain additives for various purposes. The compo sition may be administered by spreading on the skin, by holding in contact with mucous membranes, or by ing esting, and can be used as frequently as needed. Suitable forms of tocopherol include d-alpha tocoph erol, and mixed tocopherols of the dextro-rotatory form. 
 Suitable additives include coconut oil, palm kernel oil, jojoba oil, and olive lil, used in concentrations up to about 15% to lower the viscosity of the solution and to thus speed absorption; ascorby palmitate and/or glyc 
 eryl monophosphate in concentrations sufficient to emulsify the composition with water; biological or or ganic gels including aloe gel and extracts from marine algae to thicken the consistency and to stabilize the emulsion; and ethanol, in a concentration of up to about 7% by volume, to modify consistency and to increase absorption of progesterone. The composition is prepared by mixing the ingredi ents to obtain a homogeneous product. Stirring at room temperature is adequate, but may require several days to reach complete homogeneity. An oxygen-free atmo sphere is preferred but not essential. If higher tempera tures are used for faster mixing, an oxygen-free atmo sphere becomes more important to prevent oxidation of the materials. 
 Progesterone and tocopherol can be mixed in the proportions of from 1% to about 25% progesterone by weight, to about 75% to 99% of tocopherol, with a preferred concentration for most uses of from about 10% to 20% progesterone to about 80% to 90% to copherol. 
 This invention is further described in the following specific examples, which are to be considered only as illustrative of preferred embodiments of the present invention. 
 EXAMPLE 1 
 Ten kilograms of progesterone is added to 90 kilo grams of mixed tocopherols of the dextro-rotatory form, and stirred at a temperature of 45 C. until homo geneous. Thirty-five kilograms of glyceryl-monostea 
 rate is added to the composition and stirred at 45 C. until a homogeneous mixture is produced. This oil phase is then homogenized at 45° C. with a water phase composed of 200 kilograms of water mixed homoge neously with 5 kilograms of dry aloe gel, and one kilo gram of sorbic acid as a preservative. The resulting emulsion is then applied to the skin in treating systemic progesterone deficiency, and for treat 4,439,432 3 ing local skin conditions including psoriasis, or applied to a vaginal diaphragm or pessary or inserted vaginally with an appropriate applicator, for use as a contracep tive or for treating systemic progesterone deficiency. 
 EXAMPLE 2 
 Twenty kilograms of progesterone is added to 80 kilograms of mixed tocopherols, and stirred at a temper 
 ature of 40 C. until homogeneous. - - The resulting composition is applied to a pessary for use as a contraceptive, or as a local treatment for dys plasia of the uterine cervix, or is administered orally for treatment of a systemic progesterone deficiency. No preservative is needed in this composition. 
 EXAMPLE 3 
 Ten kilograms of progesterone is added to 90 kilo grams of d-alpha tocopherol and stirred at a tempera 
 ture of 30 C. until homogeneous. : The resulting composition, is then encapsulated and administered orally for treatment of systemic progester 
 one deficiency. . . . ; . . . 
 What is claimed is: 1. A composition consisting essentially of progester 
 one solubilized in tocopherol. . . . . . . 2. A pharmaceutical composition suitable for admin istering progesterone to a patient in need thereof, corn prising a pharmaceutically effective amount of proges 
 terone solubilized in tocopherol, , ...", O 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 4. 
 3. The composition of claim 2 wherein progesterone is present at a concentration of from about 1% to about 25% by weight. 4. The composition of claim 2 also containing an emulsifier, water and a preservative. 5. A method for administering progesterone to a patient in need thereof comprising administering to said patient by means other than intravenous injection, a pharmaceutically effective mixture of progesterone solubilized in tocopherol. 6. The method of claim 5 which comprises the oral administration of said mixture. 
 7. The method of claim 5 which comprises the topical 
 administration of said mixture. 
 - 8. The method of claim 5 which comprises placing said mixture in contact with the mucous membranes of the patient. 
 9. The method of contraception in which a pharma ceutically effective amount of progesterone solubilized in tocopherol is applied to the vaginal membranes and the uterine cervix by means of a vaginal diaphragm, a pessary, or other means of vaginal application in which the composition is retained within the vagina for about four hours or more after each application. ... 10. A method for making a pharmaceutically effec tive composition for the administration of progesterone to a patient in need thereof comprising solubilizing progesterone in tocopherol. 
 2k k 