Serotonin:   Energy, 
Degeneration, and Aging
Serotonin is often called a “neurotransmitter,”
and considered to act on “receptors” to “transmit
information,” which may be “processed” the waycomputers process digital information. I think it’smore useful to think of it in terms of fields andformative processes that shape the way the organismuses energy to adapt to stresses and possibilities. Itis involved in the energetic and structural changesthat occur during stress and adaptation. Getting ridof the misleading abstractions makes it easier to seesome simple patterns that exist throughout theorganism. 
The dominant and misleading
abstractions surrounding serotoninhave distracted attention from itsfundamental role in energy manage-ment, stress, and adaptation.  
The receptor doctrine is part of an ideological
attitude toward life, an attitude that would likethings to be clearly definable and uncomplicated.The fact that “hormones” and “neurotransmitters”can crucially interact with things that aren’t their“receptors” has usually been disregarded, if notdenied. The professionalization of science in the last150 years has created a culture in which authorita-tive assertions can be accepted for decades withoutany supportive evidence at all. The practice of“estrogen therapy” for prostate cancer, from the1940s to the 1990s, is an example. Statements aboutserotonin in the medical journals and mass media
and on the internet are another example. 
The development of physics, beginning with
calculations of the trajectory of cannonballs andthe production of heat in boring cannons, hasbeen guided by militarism. The development ofgenetics had ulterior motives, from Darwin’sassertion of the hereditary superiority of Englishpeople, plants, and animals, and Mendel’s denialof the mutability of traits, through KonradLorenz’s explanation of the need to exterminateinferior races. Medicine has been transformed bythe influence of the pharmaceutical industry,including the popular understanding of serotoninthat has been created by that industry. 
These three traditions—physics, genetics, and
medicine—have interacted in ways that reinforcethemes that favor the industries’ vested interests,and that eliminate themes that would harm theirinterests. For example, the major journals of“health physics” considering the biologicaleffects of radiation are controlled by the nuclearindustry, and have concentrated on heritablechanges in DNA, rather than bystander andepigenetic effects, genetic stability, and behav-ioral and physiological changes. The situations inwhich the effects of ionizing radiation, estrogens,and polyunsaturated fats synergize have beenshunned. The food and drug industries havefound common interests in promoting the biologi-cal value of increased polyunsaturated fats, estro-gens, and serotonin. Each of these has beenfeatured in huge marketing campaigns. Whenstudies of the biological role of one of thesesubstances reveals its close biochemical interac-tions with one or both of the others, this is usuallytreated as though it confirms the importance ofRay Peat's Newsletter
The people have no voice because they have no information . . .  Gore Vidal
Copyright 2019               Raymond Peat  P.O. Box 5764  Eugen e OR  97405                      July 2019
                                                                                                                                                                         
Not for republication without written permission.the study, because of the halo of cultural associa-
tions around each of them. 
The ideology of “receptors” has
allowed medicine to disregard thephysical chemistry of biologicalmolecules interacting with cells.
When serotonin was found to decrease when
people adapted to living at high altitude, the naturalresponse within the culture, where the “SSRI antide-pressants” are said to stop depression by increasingserotonin, was to assume that lower serotonin wouldmean greater depression at high altitude.  This led tostudies finding that the suicide rate in Colorado ishigh, and the mass media spread the idea widely,that the lower serotonin at higher altitude causesdepression, leading to suicide. There are highaltitude places (Ecuador, Mexico, Colombia) withvery low suicide rates, and low altitude places(Lithuania, Bangladesh, South Korea) with highsuicide rates. Economics, health, and religionstrongly affect the rate of suicide, but there is noindustry spending billions of dollars advertisingthose effects. 
The serotonin advertising culture allows major
medical journals and internet medical websites tosay that serotonin is higher in the daytime thanduring the night, and higher in the summer than inwinter, despite evidence from a great range ofspecies (e.g., Poncet, et al., 1993; Piccione, et al,2005; Curzon and Filippini, 1996; Prosser, 2003),showing that serotonin peaks during darkness, evenin nocturnally active rats and mice. Serotonin is theprecursor for melatonin, which is important foradapting to darkness by promoting sleep to reduce
stress.  Mood is generally higher in the daytime
(along with mental and physical abilities), so the
advertising culture has to claim, despite the facts,that serotonin, the happy hormone, is higher inthe daytime. 
Thinking about the events that lead to
serotonin’s synthesis will clarify its place in theorganism’s adaptive stress response system.Increased free tryptophan in the blood is the mainfactor determining the production of serotonin in thebrain, and free fatty acids, produced by stress, causebound tryptophan to be released from albumin in theblood. Hypoglycemia, resulting from many kinds ofstress, leads to an increase of free fatty acids in
the blood. Almost everyone in the US has heardthe claim that sugar’s ability to cause relaxationand sleepiness is because it causes tryptophan to
enter the brain, but in fact it is hypoglycemia,
which causes irritability and anxiety, that
increases the brain’s uptake of tryptophan
(Yehuda and Meyer, 1984; Montilla, et al., 1988;Danguir, et al., 1984; Heyes, et al., 1990).  
The synthesis of serotonin in the brain
depends on the activity of the enzyme, tryptophanhydroxylase, TPH, and this enzyme is activatedby excitation of the cell, with increased intracel-lular calcium and reduced glutathione (GSH), andinactivated by oxidation of glutathione. Stressconsumes glucose and oxygen, creating a relativehypoglycemia and hypoxia, and both of these areassociated with reductive stress, increasing theformation of serotonin.
The cultural script that aging is
caused by “oxidative stress” isbeing increasingly questioned, withthe recognition of a reductive cellu-lar state as a common factor inshock, stress, and degeneration.  
The amount of serotonin in the brain at a
particular time is influen ced by a variety of things
that affect the balance between its synthesis andits sequestration or degradation. The so-calledserotonin transporter binds and holds serotonin,reducing its interactions with other cell compo-nents, and the enzyme monoamine oxidase,MAO, degrades serotonin, turning it into theinactive 5-HIAA. Many other factors besides itsconcentration affect serotonin’s effect on thebrain, for example, the amount of dopamine.
Serotonin activates the stress hormones,  and
the cortisol produced as a result can have the
protective effect of inhibiting the enzyme thatmakes serotonin, as well as activating theMAO that removes it  (Clark and Russo, 1997;
Ou, et al., 2006; Popova, et al., 1989). Estrogen
increases serotonin synthesis, decreases its
binding, and inhibits its degradation  (Smith, et
al., 2004).2The ideology of  “receptors” has allowed
medicine to disregard the physical chemistry ofbiological molecules interacting with cells. When asubstance in the brain, 5-hydroxytryptamine, wasdiscovered in 1953 to be identical to the previouslyknown enteramine, which causes the intestine tocontract, and a vasoconstrictor substance in theblood named serotonin, with about 20 times more ofthe substance being made outside of the brain, theidea of a compartmentalization by a blood-brainbarrier allowed the strict “neurotransmitter” under-standing of serotonin’s functions to develop. 
There has been almost no interest in testing the
reality of a blood-brain barrier for serotonin. In onetest, para-chlorophenylalanine (PCPA), whichblocks the synthesis of serotonin throughout thebody by inhibiting TPH, was given to animals, andthen serotonin was injected into the brain; the bloodlevel of serotonin was quickly increased, showingfree passage from the brain into the blood. Theamount of serotonin in the urine, blood, and brainhave been shown to be very closely associated(Audhya, et al., 2012). Although serotonin is muchmore water soluble than tryptophan, the positivecharge of its ionized amino group can form a linkwith the negative charge of a phosphate group(Peters, et al., 2013) in cellular phospholipids, suchas lecithin, allowing the pair to be very mobile inthe lipophilic cytoplasm. Since even large moleculessuch as proteins can cross the so-called barrier, itshouldn’t be surprising that hormones and “neuro-transmitters” cross it, according to physical princi-ples such as solubility. 
Although its name, “serotonin,” is based on the
fact that it constricts blood vessels, it also increasestheir leakiness. Both of these actions contribute toits role in fatigue and inflammation, and to thetherapeutic effects of serotonin antagonists in avariety of problems including arthritis (Cloutier, etal., 2012) and traumatic brain injury (Okiyama, etal., 1996, Vannemreddy, et al., 2006). Stressfulexercise, increasing serotonin, decreases the brain’sability to exclude harmful substances, includingsmall particles (Feng, et al., 1996).
When large amounts of serotonin are released
into the serum by endotoxin, the amount ofs e r o t o n i n  i n  t h e  b r a i n  i s n ’ t  n e c e s s a r i l y  i n c r e a s e d .Endotoxin induces a tryptophan degrading enzyme,IDO, in the brain, producing substances that can bepro-inflammatory and immunosuppressive, and thiscan reduce the amount of tryptophan available to
make serotonin. Because of this, the depressioncaused by endotoxin inflammation can be associ-ated with decreased serotonin production in thebrain.
One of the implications of the bi-directional
movement of serotonin across the blood-brain“barrier” would be that events in the intestine,where most serotonin is produced, in the bloodwhere it’s transported, and in the lung, wheremuch of it is detoxified, will affect the brain.Toxins produced by intestinal bacteria causeserotonin to be released into the bloodstream, andif the platelets aren’t able to keep it tightly bounduntil the lungs can eliminate it, some of it willreach the brain, where it will interfere with sleepand other brain functions. 
Hypoxia or hypoglycemia causes
platelets to release serotonin duringstress.  This situation, in which it isthe serotonin that isn’t in the plate-lets that does the harm, has causeda huge amount of confusion. 
Although the liver has a much larger capacity
than the lungs for detoxifying serotonin, the lungsdetoxify several times as much of the circulatingserotonin as the liver does. The reason for this isthat in the high oxygen environment of the lungs,carbon dioxide is lost from the blood, and carbondioxide is needed for retention of serotonin by theplatelets. With the loss of CO2, the plateletsrelease their serotonin very quickly, to beimmediately detoxified by the local MAO.  Ifsomething (such as smoking, or very high oxygenconcentration, or a hormonal imbalance) inhibitsthe activity of MAO, the high local activity ofserotonin can cause lung edema, decreased bloodoxygenation, lung fibrosis and pulmonary arterialhypertension. Estrogen is an important inhibitorof MAO in the vascular endothelium; progester-one has the opposite effect, increasing the activityof MAO (Youdim, et al., 1989). 
When the lungs fail to detoxify the serotonin
released from platelets in the presence of a highlevel of oxygen, a sample of blood taken from avein will show a depletion of serotonin in the3platelets, and an increase in the plasma. This situa-
tion of an increase in plasma serotonin withdecreased platelet serotonin exists in people withpulmonary hypertension (Hervé, et al., 1995;Kéreveur, et al., 2000), and a variety of other degen-erative conditions, including heart failure (Ahmedand Nussbaum, 1981). Energy deprivation, forexample caused by hypoglycemia or hypoxia,causes platelets to release serotonin during stress.This situation, in which it is the serotonin that isn’tin the platelets that does the harm, has caused ahuge amount of confusion. 
The beneficial effects of negatively ionized air
on health and mood have been recognized forseveral decades. Beginning in the 1960s (Kruegerand Smith, 1960), several investigators have foundthat breathing negatively ionized air accelerates thedegradation of serotonin in the lungs. When theoxygen molecule carries an extra electron, it canfunction as the superoxide radical ion (Goldstein, etal., 1992), and this form of active oxygen oxidizesserotonin (Wrona and Dryhurst, 1998; Peña-Silva, etal., 2009); it is thought to be an intermediary in theaction of MAO.
The ideology around stress physi-
ology, falsifying the meaning ofserotonin, estrogen, unsaturated fats,sugar, lactate, carbon dioxide, andvarious other biological molecules,has hidden the simple remedies formost of the inflammatory and degen-erative diseases.
The enzyme that degrades superoxide, superox-
ide dismutase (SOD), is sold as a health foodsupplement, following the cultural script that agingis caused by “oxidative stress,” and that antioxidantsare protective. That view is being increasinglyquestioned, with the recognition of a reductivecellular state as a common factor in shock, stress,and degeneration. A large excess of SOD occurs inDown’s syndrome, and is associated with theirdecreased longevity. When an increase of SOD isproduced in cultured cells and in mice and worms,similar harmful effects—accelerated aging—areseen (Nabarra, et al., 1996; Feaster, et al., 1977;Groner, et al., 1990, 1994; Tamarkina, et al.,
1997). Serotonin is one of the factors that canincrease the formation of SOD (Stralin andMaryland, 2001).
The physical problems (sexual dysfunction,
gynecomastia, osteoporosis, glaucoma, cancer,dementia, pulmonary hypertension) that canresult from a chronic excess of serotonin are nowwidely recognized, but the idea of serotonin as a“happy hormone” persists, helping to sell theSSRI, with about 40 million people in the UScurrently using them. The known effects ofincreased serotonin on mood and behavior aren’tat all consistent with the SSRI marketing idea, soas they become better known insurance compa-nies might begin to discourage their use.
 The SSRI drugs inhibit the binding of
serotonin to the “serotonin transporter,” increas-ing the effects of serotonin. Mice have beenaltered to knock-out the gene that makes thattransporter. These mice have elevated basalserotonin and increased aggression (Pang, et al.,2012). They more easily become depressed bystress (Wellman, et al., 2007), are more anxiousand less exploratory (Carroll, et al., 2007), thecortex of their brain is thinner (Altamura, et al.,2007), their fear memory is enhanced (Lima, etal.,2019), and males are less active and tend tobecome obese without eating more (Uçeyler, etal., 2010).
Mice have also been altered to eliminate the
genes that make both the peripheral and the braintryptophan hydroxylase that makes serotonin.The double knock-out mice completely lackingserotonin were, surprisingly, “viable and normalin appearance” (Savelieva, et al, 2008), but theydid differ in behavior and resistance to stress.They were less likely to die from sepsis and fromtoxin-induced lung fibrosis (Zhang, et al., 2018,2017).
Since 2004, the FDA has required a warning
that antidepressants can increase “suicidality,”aggression, and other problems, and since thenseveral studies have shown changes in the brainsof people who have died by suicide, showingabnormally high levels of both serotonin and itsbreakdown product, 5-HIAA, increased amountsof TPH, the enzyme that makes it, and anincreased number of the serotonergic cells that4secrete it (Bach, et al., 2014; Bach-Mizrachi, et al.,
2006, 2008; Underwood, et al., 1999).   
Several serotonin antagonist drugs are increas-
ingly recognized as antidepressants, and also fortreatment of chronic fatigue and insomnia, andmany of the degenerative diseases, but since most ofthem are prescription drugs, their use won’t bewidespread as long as most doctors accept the myth.The ideology around stress physiology, falsifyingthe meaning of serotonin, estrogen, unsaturated fats,sugar, lactate, carbon dioxide, and various otherbiological molecules, has hidden the simpleremedies for most of the inflammatory and degen-erative diseases. 
Avoiding prolonged fasting and stressful
exercise that increase free fatty acids, and combin-ing sugars with proteins to keep free fatty acids low,and using aspirin, niacinamide, or cyproheptadine toreduce the formation of free fatty acids by unavoid-able stress, avoiding an excess of phosphate relativeto calcium in the diet, having milk and other antis-tress foods at bedtime or during the night, and beingin a brightly lighted environment during the day,with regular sunlight exposure, can minimize theharmful effects of excessive serotonin and reducethe inflammation, fibrosis, and atrophy associatedwith it. 
A later newsletter will consider serotonin in
relation to age related changes in metabolism,atrophy, fibrosis and cancer.
REFERENCES
J Clin Pharmacol. 1981 Feb-Mar;21(2):126-8.
Development of pulmonary edema related to
heparin administration. Ahmed SS, Nussbaum M.
Cereb Cortex. 2007 Jun;17(6):1394-401.
Altered neocortical cell density and layer thick-
ness in serotonin transporter knockout mice: aquantitation study.  Altamura C, Dell'Acqua ML,
Moessner R, Murphy DL, Lesch KP, Persico AM.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;
1820(10):1496-501. Correlation of serotonin
levels in CSF, platelets, plasma, and urine.
Audhya T, Adams JB, Johansen L.
Synapse. 2014 Mar;68(3):127-30. Elevated
serotonin and 5-HIAA in the brainstem and
lower serotonin turnover in the prefrontal cortexof suicides.  Bach H, Huang YY, Underwood MD,
Dwork AJ, Mann JJ, Arango V.Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006 Apr;31 (4):
81-2 Neuronal tryptophan hydroxylase mRNA
expression in the human dorsal and median
raphe nuclei: major depression and suicide.
Bach-Mizrachi H, Underwood MD, Kassir SA,Bakalian MJ, Sibille E, Tamir H, Mann JJ,Arango V.
Mol Psychiatry. 2008 May;13(5):507-13, 465.
Elevated expression of tryptophan
hydroxylase-2 mRNA at the neuronal level inthe dorsal and median raphe nuclei ofdepressed suicides.  Bach-Mizrachi H, Under-
wood MD, Tin A, Ellis SP, Mann JJ, Arango V.
Behav Genet. 2007 Jan;37(1):214-22. Effects
of mild early life stress on abnormal emotion-
related behaviors in 5-HTT knockout mice.
Carroll JC, Boyce-Rustay JM, Millstein R, YangR, Wiedholz LM, Murphy DL, Holmes A.
Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1997
Sep;48(2):346-54. Tissue-specific glucocorti-
coid regulation of tryptophan hydroxylase
mRNA levels. Clark MS, Russo AF.
Curzon, G (1996). Filippini GA ed.  B r a i n
tryptophan: normal and disturbed control.
Recent advances in tryptophan research.  New
York: Plenum Press, pp. 27–34.      
Neurochem Int. 1984;6(1):71-5.  I n c r e a s e d
dopamine and serotonin metabolites in CSF
during severe insulin-induced hypoglycemia infreely moving rats.  Danguir J, Elghozi JL,
Laude D.
Eur J Pharmacol. 2005 Dec 5;526
(1-3):125-39. 5-HT1A and 5-HT1B receptor
agonists and aggression: a pharmacological
challenge of the serotonin deficiency hypothe-sis. de Boer SF, Koolhaas JM.
Am J Hum Genet. 1977 Nov;29(6):563-70.
Dosage effects for superoxide dismutase-1 in
nucleated cells aneuploid for chromosome 21.
Feaster WW, Kwok LW, Epstein CJ.
International Journal of Biometeorology June
1992, Volume 36, Issue 2, pp 118–122. Negative
air ions as a source of superoxide.  Goldstein
NI, Goldstein RN, Merzlyak MN.
Biomed Pharmacother. 1994;48(5-6):231-40.
Cell damage by excess CuZnSOD and Down's
syndrome.  Groner Y, Elroy-Stein O, Avraham
KB, Schickler M, Knobler H, Minc-Golomb D,Bar-Peled O, Yarom R, Rotshenker S.5J Physiol (Paris). 1990;84(1):53-77. Down
syndrome clinical symptoms are manifested in
transfected cells and transgenic mice overex-pressing the human Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutasegene.  Groner Y, Elroy-Stein O, Avraham KB,
Yarom R, Schickler M, Knobler H, Rotman G.
Am J Med. 1995 Sep;99(3):249-54. Increased
plasma serotonin in primary pulmonary hyper-
tension.  Hervé P, Launay JM, Scrobohaci ML,
Brenot F, Simonneau G, Petitpretz P, Poubeau P,Cerrina J, Duroux P, Drouet L.
 J Neurochem. 1990 Mar;54(3):1027-33.  B r a i n
and plasma quinolinic acid in profound insulin-
induced hypoglycemia.  Heyes MP, Papagapiou M,
Leonard C, Markey SP, Auer RN.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000
Oct;20(10):2233-9. High plasma serotonin levels
in primary pulmonary hypertension. Effect of
long-term epoprostenol (prostacyclin) therapy.
Kéreveur A, Callebert J, Humbert M, Hervé P,Simonneau G, Launay JM, Drouet L.
 J Gen Physiol. 1960 Nov;44:269-76.  T h e
biological mechanisms of air ion action. II.
Negative air ion effects on the concentration andmetabolism of 5-hydroxytryptamine in themammalian respiratory tract. Krueger AP, Smith
RF.
Transl Psychiatry. 2019 Apr 17;9(1):139.
Enhanced discriminative aversive learning and
amygdala responsivity in 5-HT transportermutant mice.  Lima J, Sharp T, Bannerman DM,
McHugh SB.
Synapse. 2011 Nov;65(11):1166-72. Inhibition
of the serotonin transporter induces microglial
activation and downregulation of dopaminergicneurons in the substantia nigra. MacGillivray L,
Reynolds KB, Sickand M, Rosebush PI, MazurekMF.
Rev Esp Fisiol. 1988 Mar;44(1):93-7. [Brain
serotonin in response to the hypothalamo-
hypophyseal-adrenal system to insulin hypogly-cemia].  Montilla P, Montilla J, Pinilla J, Muñoz
MC.
 Lab Invest. 1996 Mar;74(3):617-26. Trans-
genic mice overexpressing the human
Cu/Zn-SOD gene: ultrastructural studies of apremature thymic involution model of Down'ssyndrome (trisomy 21).  Nabarra B, Casanova M,
Paris D, Nicole A, Toyama K, Sinet PM, Ceballos I,London J.J Neurotrauma. 1994 Feb;11(1):83-95.
(S)-emopamil attenuates acute reduction in
regional cerebral blood flow following experi-mental brain injury.  Okiyama K, Rosenkrantz
TS, Smith DH, Gennarelli TA, McIntosh TK.
J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 28;281(30):21512-25.
Glucocorticoid and androgen activation of
monoamine oxidase A is regulated differentlyby R1 and Sp1.  Ou XM, Chen K, Shih JC.
Life Sci. 2012 Oct 5;91(11-12):365-368.
Circadian rhythmicity in serotonin trans-
porter knockout mice.  Pang RD, Holschneider
DP, Miller JD. 
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009
Oct; 297(4): H1354–H1360. Serotoninproduces monoamine oxidase-dependentoxidative stress in human heart valves. Peña-
Silva RA, Miller JD,  Chu Y, Heistad DD.
J Circadian Rhythms. 2005 Apr 28;3(1):6.
Central fatigue and nycthemeral change of
serum tryptophan and serotonin in the athletichorse.  Piccione G, Assenza A, Fazio F, Perci-
palle M, Caola G.
 J Neural Transm Gen Sect. 1993;
92(2-3):137-50.  Daily variations in in vivo
tryptophan hydroxylation and in the contents
of serotonin and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid indiscrete brain areas of the rat.  P o n c e t  L ,
Denoroy L, Jouvet M.
Vopr Med Khim. 1989 Jul-Aug;35(4):114-9.
[The effect of emotional stress and corticoster-
one on the activity of monoaminoxidase in therat brain]. Popova NK, Voi NN, Maslova LN.
PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3301. Genetic
disruption of both tryptophan hydroxylase
genes dramatically reduces serotonin andaffects behavior in models sensitive to antide-pressants.  Savelieva KV, Zhao S, Pogorelov
VM, Rajan I, Yang Q, Cullinan E, Lanthorn TH.
Brain Res 966: 110–115, (2003).  Serotonin
phase-shifts the mouse suprachiasmatic
circadian clock in vitro.   Prosser, RA 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004 Nov;29
(11): 2035-45. Effects of ovarian steroids and
raloxifene on proteins that synthesize, trans-
port, and degrade serotonin in the rapheregion of macaques.  Smith LJ, Henderson JA,
Abell CW, Bethea CL.
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol281:
H1621–H1629, 2001. Vasoactive factors and6growth factors altervascular smooth muscle cell
EC-SOD expression STRÅLIN P,  MARKLUND
SL.
Genetika. 1977;13(5):929-32.  [Dosage effect of
the cytoplasmic superoxide dismutase (SOD-1)
gene in the erythrocytes of Down's syndromepatients].  Tamarkina AD, Annenkov GA, Filippov
IK, Lamchingii T.
Int J Obes (Lond). 2010 Apr;34(4):701-11. Lack
of the serotonin transporter in mice reduces
locomotor activity and leads to gender-dependentlate onset obesity.  Uçeyler N, Schütt M, Palm F,
Vogel C, Meier M, Schmitt A, Lesch KP, MössnerR, Sommer C.
Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2007 May;31(5):837-45.
Morphometry of dorsal raphe nucleus serotoner-
gic neurons in alcoholism.  Underwood MD, Mann
JJ, Arango V.
Biol Psychiatry. 1999 Aug 15;46(4):473-83.
Morphometry of the dorsal raphe nucleus seroto-
nergic neurons in suicide victims.  Underwood
MD, Khaibulina AA, Ellis SP, Moran A, Rice PM,Mann JJ, Arango V.
Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2006;96:151-6.  Z i n c
protoporphyrin IX attenuates closed head injury-
induced edema formation, blood-brain barrierdisruption, and serotonin levels in the rat.
Vannemreddy P, Ray AK, Patnaik R, Patnaik S,Mohanty S, Sharma HS.
J Neurosci. 2007 Jan 17;27(3):684-91.
Impaired stress-coping and fear extinction and
abnormal corticolimbic morphology in serotonintransporter knock-out mice.  Wellman CL,
Izquierdo A, Garrett JE, Martin KP, Carroll J,Millstein R, Lesch KP, Murphy DL, Holmes A.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1980 Jan;212(1):97-102.
Clearance of 5-hydroxy-tryptamine by rat lung
and liver: the importance of relative perfusionand intrinsic clearance.  Wiersma DA, Roth RA.
Chem Res Toxicol. 1998 Jun;11(6):639-50.
Oxidation of serotonin by superoxide radical:
implications to neurodegenerative brain disor-ders.  Wrona MZ, Dryhurst G.
 Neuroendocrinology. 1984 Jan;38(1):25-32. A
role for serotonin in the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal response to insulin stress. Yehuda R,
Meyer JS.
FASEB J. 1989 Apr;3(6):1753-9.  Steroid
regulation of monoamine oxidase activity in theadrenal medulla. Youdim MB(1), Banerjee DK,
Kelner K, Offutt L, Pollard HB.
Mediators Inflamm. 2017;2017:6374283.
5-HT Drives Mortality in Sepsis Induced by
Cecal Ligation and Puncture in Mice.  Zhang J,
Bi J, Liu S, Pang Q, Zhang R, Wang S, Liu C.
Mediators Inflamm. 2018 Apr 16; 2018:
7967868. eCollection 2018.  Serotonin Exhibits
Accelerated Bleomycin-Induced Pulmonary
Fibrosis through TPH1 Knockout MouseExperiments.  Zhang J, Cui R, Feng Y, Gao W,
Bi J, Li Z, Liu C.
               ******************7