Sleep and Aging
Research on sleep, as on other physiologi-
cal processes, is guided by our assumptionsand culture. Our understanding of the natureof consciousness affects our thoughts aboutwhat happens during these periods of itsabsence, but in attempting to understandwhat’s happening in the brain when it isn’tconscious some researchers have freedthemselves from the dominant “philosophy ofmind” of the neuroscientists, and I think theirmore objective look at the sleeping brain isopening some new perspectives on thefunctions of the waking brain—and on life ingeneral.   
The disastrous separation of body
and mind which has been fixed onEuropean thought by Descartes isresponsible for this blindness ofscience.                       A. N. Whitehead
Many “cognitive scientists” have thought
of the brain as a computer, in which synapsesrepresent switches, and digital patterns repre-sent information and l ogical relationships.
When the logic circuits aren’t operating, thismodel simply represents nothing, but thosewho follow Norbert Wiener’s example,viewing the brain as a cybernetic controlsystem, rather than as a logic machine, have afruitful model that can represent the brain as itgoes through various changes of state.For Lamarck, irritability or sensibility, the
ability to be stimulated and to react, was life’sbasic property. The ability to relax after beingstimulated, in preparation for another reaction,is probably just as essential, for organismsthat do something more than replicatethemselves. The ability to relax and toaccumulate energy and substance for differen-tiation corresponds to the presence of oxida-tive, high efficiency energy production. Theintensity of the metabolic cycle, alternatingactivity and quiescence, sustains the complex-ity and intensity of life.
Bacteria, which are always in the process
of replicating if food is available, don’t haveanything that corresponds to sleep, or at leastno one has observed it. Many people assumethat the same would apply to a more complexsingle cell animal such as the amoeba, but fewpeople have bothere d to look. In 1908, two
researchers took turns, during 6 days and 5nights, continuously observing the activitiesof a group of Amoeba proteus, and concludedthat “Activity, or the performing of work,requires energy which the protoplasm mustsupply. The period of rest appears to besimply the result of organic satisfaction, or aperiod of recuperation. It suggests the lowestform of sleep; for this tendency to rest, tosleep, as a food reaction is illustrated by thehigher animals. In this respect this lowestform of life does not differ essentially fromthe higher forms.”  (Gibbs and Dellinger,1908.)Ray Peat's Newsletter
. . . Pray God us keep From Single vision & Newton’s sleep!   Blake
Copyright 2018            Raymond Peat  P.O. Box 5764  Eugene OR  97405                 March 2018
Not for republication without written permission.The sleep of all animals, flies, worms,
reptiles, fish, etc., resembles human sleep invarious ways, especially in its importance forgood health. If a fly is deprived of sleep, it’ssleepier the next day, its learning is impaired,and if it’s kept awake f or three days it will die.
In rats, prolonged sleep disruption produces asyndrome of increased food intake, weightloss, increased noradrenaline, decreasedthyroxine, decreased body temperature, anddeath (Rechtschaffen, et al., 1989).  
The whole organism sleeps, though the
brain regulates the process. In some aspects ofits metabolism, especially the turnover ofphospholipids, the brain is very active duringsleep, but its energy consumption decreases,and it causes the skeletal muscles to relax,reducing their consumption of glucose.Although free fatty acids normally increaseduring the night, their increase is much greaterwhen sleep is inadequate, and a diabetes-likemetabolism appears, with a shift toward theoxidation of fat rather than glucose.
In an experiment in which blood samples
were taken at 15 minute intervals during thenight, the concentration of cortisol was foundto start increasing when the light was turnedoff, whether the person was asleep or not, butthe rise was slower when the person wasasleep. In animal experiments, it was foundthat their mitochondria progressively deterio-rated during the hours of darkness. The wellknown peak of cortisol at dawn is sometimessaid to be caused by “the biological clock,preparing for the day’s activity,” but theexperiments show that the stress of darknesscreates an inefficient catabolic state, in whichcortisol breaks down tissues to provideglucose, and that sleep, to some extent,reduces the stress. 
Although nerves and muscles are called
“excitable cells,” they work best when theyaren’t too excitable, and fatigue, or interfer-ence with their energy supply, makes them too
excitable—muscles cramp, nerves die from“excitotoxicity.” A deficiency of energy, from
either hypoglycemia or hypoxia, makesnerves and muscles too excitable, producingseizures and vascular spasms. When a nervecell is using oxygen to produce energy, itbecomes much more electrically charged thanother cells, becoming an “electron sink.” Thatcauses the head to have an electricallypositive polarity, relative to other parts of thebody. 
When the electrical activity of a cell is
measured with an intracellular electrode, the“membrane potential” is high when it’s readyfor work, and decreases or disappears duringthe excited working state. This applies to allsorts of differentiated cells. When cells are inthe process of dividing, they stop their differ-entiated functioning, and lose their electricalmembrane potential, as they shift completelyaway from oxidative energy metabolism.They are in a low energy active state. Whencell division is finished, oxidative metabolismresumes, and with the higher energy state, ameasurable electrical potential returns. 
The high energy resting state is
achieved when energy production isgreater than energy expenditure.Thyroid hormone and oxidation ofsugar produce energy; progesteroneand carbon dioxide prevent wastefulexpenditure of energy. 
For about 150 years, it has been known
that electrical current applied to the brain
could induce sleep or anesthesia ; people who
were aware that sleep can be therapeutic haveproposed using electricity to prolong sleep,and possibly to correct age related conditions.In recent decades, several experimenters haveshown that applying a positive current to thehead of an animal or person improves learning(Marshall, et al., 2004). This externallyapplied electrical current seems to be2reinforcing a process that occurs during sleep,
a deepening of the resistance to excitatoryinfluences. 
“You start with a random
clump of atoms, and if you shinelight on it for long enough, itshould not be so surprising thatyou get a plant.”   
                             Jeremy England
Groups of brain cells, removed from a
brain and observed in vitro, interact in a waythat’s analogous to res onance of electrons in
molecules or of molecules in physical objects;their electrical activity gradually becomescoordinated, producing electrical signalsresembling the EEG (electroencephalogram)signal of a brain in the state of slow wave(deep) sleep. If the cells in the culture dish areelectrically stimulated, the sleep rhythm disap-
p e a r s ,  a n d  t h e y  s h o w  a n  E E G  p a t t e r n  r e s e m -bling that of a waking brain. The day afterbeing electrically stimulated, their sleeprhythm is deepened, the way a person’s sleepis deeper after losing sleep (Krueger and Roy,2016).
When cells are excited, they release some
ATP into their local surroundings, where itsignals fatigue or injury, activating the forma-tion of inflammatory factors such asTNF-alpha, which promote the sleep rhythm.A breakdown product of ATP is adenosine,which accumulates during waking, anddecreases during sleep.  A small area of thebrain can go into the sleep rhythm earlier thanother areas, if it has been more strongly stimu-lated. Experimenters found that prolongedstimulation of the l eft hand, by holding a
vibrator, caused the subsequent sleepintensity, represented by higher amplitude ofthe slow waves, to be greater on the right sideof the brain, which received the increasedsensory stimulation from the left hand. If anarm is immobilized during the day, the sleep
waves on the corresponding side of the brainwill be weaker in the following sleep.
At the onset of slow wave deep sleep,
there is a surge of ATP concentration(Dworak, et al., 2010), coinciding with adecrease of the enzyme AMPK, indicating ashift away from catabolic processes. Thebrain’s consumption of glucose and oxygen isvery low during this time. During the hours ofnormal sleep, this elevated level of ATPgradually declines toward the normal daytimelevel, and the excitability of the neuronsgradually rises to the normal waking level. 
The electrical and metabolic properties of
this high energy resting state of the brain canbe seen in a healthy skeletal muscle, whichhas a high ATP content, and relaxes immedi-ately after stimulation and contraction. If theATP is depleted by prol onged intense stimula-
tion, or if it isn’t replenished quickly enough,because of hypothyroidism, the relaxation isvery slow, leading to cramping. The Achillesreflex relaxation test used for identifyinghypothyroidism makes the slow relaxationvisible. Since thyroid hormone is needed foroxidative metabolism everywhere in the body,its deficiency makes brain cells slow to relax,delaying the onset of sleep, and can evenprevent the deepest restorative sleep. Since allcells are regulated by excitatory and inhibi-tory processes, hypothyroidism can create abias toward excitatory states, leading toabnormal secretion and proliferation, forexample.
The diastolic, relaxed phase of the heart
contraction cycle commonly fails under stressor old age—even in fruit flies. The heart stiff-ens, and fails to fill completely, so it pumpsless with each stroke. In old age, the deepphase of sleep becomes shorter and shallower.When fruit flies are kept active for 2 and ahalf hours during the day, their deep sleep thefollowing night is improved, and their heart
3function is improved (Klassen, et al., 2017;
Zheng, et al., 2015).
Bright light during th e day strongly stimu-
lates the brain, and improves the depth andduration of deep sleep during the night(Wams, et al., 2017). 
Beginning around 1910, Pavlov began
studying the ways in which stimulation canbring on sleep, and although electricaltechniques such as the EEG hadn’t beendeveloped yet, he and his associates gave verydetailed descriptions of the interactions ofexcitation and inhibiti on in the cortex of the
brain, showing that sleep begins in the cortex,and spreads to other parts of the brain andbody. They found that the character of anindividual governs the way the nervoussystem responds to fatigue and stress. Outsideof Russia, the popularity of Freudian psychol-ogy and Behaviorism caused that work to beignored. 
 One of Pavlov’s students, T. Hayashi,
identified the structures in the brainstem thatintegrate eye movement, the inner ear vestibu-lar system, the cerebellum, and the regulatorsof muscle tone. The familiar events at theonset of sleep can be understood in terms ofthe spread of inhibition from the cortex to the
brainstem and adjoining structures.  
 The brain’s inhibition of some of the
body’s functions during sleep is important,
because the progressive failure of mitochon-dria during darkness wastes glucose, leadingto a catabolic metabolism (with increasedgrowth hormone, free fatty acids, prolactin,parathyroid hormone, thyroid stimulating
hormone, cortisol, histamine, and inflamma-tory cytokines), converti ng protein to glucose,
liberating free fatty acids, and breaking downbone. During the night, even with the quietingactions of sleep, breakdown of protein ismuch faster than synthesis, and calcium is lostfrom the bones. 
Exposure of the whole body to red light at
the beginning of the ni ght not only improvesthe quality of sleep, but also endurance and
performance the next day (Zhao, et al., 2012).Optimizing mitochondrial function at thebeginning of the night makes the brain’sinhibitory signals more effective, preservingglycogen stores and reducing noctural
catabolism. 
The pavlovians’ approach to sleep
research recognized that the body’s needs arealways part of the way the organism relates tothe world, affecting the meaning of eachexperience, so that the previous life experi-ence of an individual affects the way thatparticular daily events will affect the sleepthat follows. Stimulation and excitationalways have a particular structure, accordingto the perceived meaning, and for Pavlov, theresulting inhibition was also structured. Hesaw the dreams that occurred during sleep asresidual shadows or fragments of themeanings that were experienced during theday. When sleep wasn’t fully restorative,patterns of excitation and inhibition couldpersist, becoming chronic influences onbehavior and physiology. 
In order to acquire learning, we
must first shake ourselves free of it.We must grasp the topic in therough, before we smooth it out andshape it.                     A. N. Whitehead
Pavlov recognized that character types, in
his dogs and in people, were influenced byhormones and by persona l history. Present
knowledge of prenatal influence on the devel-opment of autistic traits, in people and inexperimental animals, is consistent withPavlov’s observation that some animals wereoverwhelmed by stimulation that otheranimals could adapt to easily. Individuals whoare hypometabolic are more susceptible to theharmful effects of sleep deprivation, beingless able to quickly restore the high energy4resting state. In that state, even relatively
weak stimulation can be damaging. For thegeneration of therapist s who followed Pavlov,
such as K.I. Platonov (1930), the induction ofsleep was considered to be the most effectiveaspect of psychotherapy. 
The rise of free fatty acids in the serum
during the night coincides with a high rate ofturnover of the brain’s phospholipids. Polyun-saturated fatty acids are preferentially liber-ated from fat stores, in proportion to theirdegree of unsaturation (Raclot, 2003; Conner,et al., 1996), so their interchange with thebrain’s lipids means that each night the brainwill become enriched with the highly unsatu-rated fats that are most susceptible to lipidperoxidation. The intens ity of lipolysis during
the night is decreased during the most restora-tive deep sleep, but the free fatty acidsthemselves, by blocking oxidation of glucoseto carbon dioxide, tend to increase lactate andto depress glucose metabolism, creating aninflammatory and excitatory state that inter-feres with deep sleep.
 The accumulation of arachidonic acid
with aging will tend to increase the formationof prostaglandins, which promote wakefulnessand inhibit both slow wave and REM sleep(Matsumura, et al., 1988, 1989; Onoe, et al.,1992). Producing a deficiency of the “essen-tial fatty acids” in animals increases theduration of their slow wave sleep (Dzoljic,1978). Using aspirin at bedtime, to inhibitprostaglandin synthesis, is likely to be helpfulin age related insomnia. Progesterone andvitamin E act in various ways to preventexcessive stimulation by prostaglandins.
Using snacks to minimize the nocturnal
increase of free fatty acids and hypoglycemiais an effective way to support restorativesleep, and to retard the brain-aging effects ofthe accumulation of the unstable fatty acids.Calcium and vitamin D, sufficient to keepparathyroid hormone low , contribute to that
process.Salty snacks are especially helpful for
bringing on sleep, probably by stabilizingblood glucose and lowering adrenalin. Icecream, combining sugar, calcium, and somefat that prolongs the absorption of the sugar,is often effective for improving the quality ofsleep.  
Thyroid hormone, by pr omoting the oxida-
tion of glucose, and increasing ATP, isextremely important for the ability to achieveand maintain the needed deep sleep. Hypothy-roid people who often find that sleep isn’trefreshing, sometimes enter only the firstsuperficial stage of sleep. Thyroxin, T4, helpsto reduce the nocturnal level of the proinflam-matory thyroid stimulating hormone, TSH,but 5 or 10 mcg of the immediately active T3at bedtime will usually produce sleep within afew minutes.
Even coffee, if it’s used in the right
amounts at the right time, can improve thequality of sleep, by supporting the body’senergy processes.
                           REFERENCES
J Lipid Res. 1996 Feb;37(2):290-8. Differen-
tial mobilization of fatty acids from adipose
tissue.  Conner WE, Lin DS, Colvis C.
Prostaglandins. 1978 Feb;15(2):317-24.
Prostaglandins and sleep. Awaking effect of
prostaglandins and sleep pattern of essentialfatty acids deficient (EFAD) rats.  Dzoljic MR.
The American Journal of Psychology Vol. 19,
No. 2, Apr., 1908. The Daily Life of Amœba
Proteus. David Gibbs and O. P. Dellinger
Am J Clin Nutr. 2007 Sep;86(3):
s867-71 .  Metabolic syndrome, hyperinsuline-
mia, and cancer.  H s u  I R ,  K i m  S P ,  K a b i r  M ,
Bergman RN.
Eur J Neurosci. 2013  Jul;38(2):   2199-2209.
Sleep: A synchrony of cell activity-driven small
network states . Krueger JM, Huang YH, Rector
DM, Buysse DJ.
Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1997
Dec;28(4):401-3. [Circadian variations of5plasma SOD and MDA in health subjects].
[Article in Chinese] Luo H, Guo H, Xiao J, XueZ.
J Neurosci. 2004 Nov 3;24(44):9985-92.
Transcranial direct current stimulation during
sleep improves declarative memory. Marshall L,
Mölle M, Hallschmid M, Born J.
Brain Res. 1988 Mar 22;444(2):265-72.
Awaking effect of PGE2 microinjected into the
preoptic area of rats.  Matsumura H, Goh Y,
Ueno R, Sakai T, Hayaishi O.
Sleep Breath. 2008 Aug;12(3):199-205.
Caffeine intake is independently associated
with neuropsychological performance inpatients with obstructive sleep apnea.  Norman
D(1), Bardwell WA, Loredo JS, Ancoli-Israel S,Heaton RK, Dimsdale JE.
J Neurosci. 1992 Jul;12(7):2715-25. Prosta-
glandin E2 exerts an awaking effect in the
posterior hypothalamus at a site distinct fromthat mediating its febrile action in the anteriorhypothalamus.  Onoe H, Watanabe Y, Ono K,
Koyama Y, Hayaishi O.
Prog Lipid Res. 2003 Jul;42(4):257-88. Selec-
tive mobilization of fatty acids from adipose
tissue triacylglycerols.  Raclot T.
Physiol Behav. 1990 Nov;48(5):749-53. Rates
of cerebral protein synthesis are linked to slow
wave sleep in the rat.  Ramm P, Smith CT.
Sleep 12, 68–87 (1989). Sleep deprivation in
the rat: X. Integration and discussion of the
findings.    Rechtschaffen, A., Bergmann, B. M.,
Everson, C. A., Kushida, C. A. & Gilliland, M.A.   
Platonov, K. I. The Word as a Physiological
and Therapeutic Factor: The Theory and
Practice of Psychotherapy According to I. P.Pavlov. Translation by David A.. Myshne of the
1955 revised and enlarged second edition of_Slovo kak Fisiologicheskii i lechevn'ii faktor_.Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House,1959. Small 4to. 1st Edition in English. [Firstpublished 1930 in Russian]. 
Sleep. 2017 Dec 1;40 (12). Linking Light
Exposure and Subsequent Sleep: A Field
Polysomnography Study in Humans.  Wams EJ,Woelders T, Marring I, van Rosmalen L, Beersma
DGM, Gordijn MCM, Hut RA.
J Athl Train. 2012 Nov-Dec;47(6):673-8. Red
light and the sleep quality and endurance
performance of Chinese female basketballplayers.  Zhao J, Tian Y, Nie J, Xu J, Liu D.
[…with an average wavelength of 658 nm andlight dose of 30 J/cm2.]
              ******************6