 
References  
Peat, R. (1993). The Bean Syndrome. Townsend Letter for Doctors & Patients , (115/116), 246. 
Retrieved f rom EBSCO host. 
 
 
The Bean Syndrome  
The Bean Syndrome  
An extract of the common bean (phytohaemagglutinin, PHA) is widely used in research, and has 
been used occasionally in medicine. The effects of bean toxin, and other  plant toxins (e.g., 
pokeberry) overlap in several ways with viral infection and autoimmune disease. PHA causes, 
for example, the appearance of large mononuclear cells in the blood, the suppression of DNA 
synthesis in thymic cells, a slight leucopenia, and  hepatic necrosis. Extracts of lentils, broad 
beans, and fenugreek (used in curry) are as active as PHA, and extracts of common peas, chick 
peas, lupinus, and soy beans also have some activity. The effects of a single exposure (such as 
eating a pokeberry) can remain microscopically visible for two weeks. ( 1) 
In aging, stress, and malnutrition, the barrier function of the intestine is weakened. Vitamin A 
and magnesium deficiencies allow macromolecules to enter the blo od from the intestine. ( 2) 
Injury to the bowel causes "flu -like" symptoms. There have been reports that the viruses of 
"respiratory diseases" appear in the intestine before they appear in the respiratory tract. Alva rez 
found that "when a dog gets distemper the gradient of latent period down its small bowel is 
reversed," and he suggests that in a cold "a systolic, non -progressive type of contraction 
appears." He says codeine is the best medicine to block a cold. (I ha ve argued that it is vitamin 
C's laxative action which can interrupt cold symptoms.) Recent research shows that naloxone, 
the morphine antagonist, can restore normal responses to the stressed bowel. Alvarez was 
interested in chronic fatigue and "painful fa tigue," and remarked that occasionally "a fatigue state 
will follow a bout with some infection such as influenza." ( 3) 
Bacterial toxins, whether produced in the intestine or in the manufacture of food supplements, 
pass through the wall of the intestine in larger amounts in stress, malnutrition, and old age. 
Endotoxin suppresses mitochondrial respiration, and tends to produce a shock -physiology similar 
to that produced by endogenous hormones. I have mentioned before t hat I think endotoxin can be 
involved in the premenstrual syndrome, and I think it might even be involved in some breast 
syndromes. ( 4) 
Two features of mitochondrial damage in severe stress (regardless of whether en dotoxin is 
involved) are a depletion of the antioxidant reserves, and loss of the ability to convert cholesterol 
into the protective steroid hormones. Mitochondrial damage is more likely in hypothyroidism, as 
I have discussed previously; thyroxin inhibits lipid peroxidation, end it tends to be inversely 
related to adrenalin, preventing or minimizing "catecholamine toxicity," for example.  Beans and lentils happen to be powerful anti -thyroid agents, so it isn't surprising to see 
indications of decreased aerob ic capacity, resulting from decreased peak oxygen consumption ( 5) 
in association with the chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), if that syndrome is caused by chronic 
exposure to dietary legumes.  
Hypothyroidism causes poor  magnesium retention, so the report that a magnesium supplement 
caused reduced pain and improved energy level and emotional state, while increasing 
intracellular magnesium in CFS patients, ( 6) suggests a role for hy pothyroidism in CFS.  
One of the symptoms specific to chronic fatigue syndrome ( 7) - postexertional malaise, marked 
by pain and weakness and by an exacerbation of other symptoms including fever and adenopathy 
- can b e explained as the result of increased absorption of bowel toxins which follows the 
relative ischemia of the intestine during intense adrenergic stimulation.  
A day or more after eating an allergen, it can be resting harmlessly in the intestine, and exertio n, 
or emotion, or hunger, or nighttime can lower the blood sugar enough to cause a surge of 
adrenalin. The adrenalin reduces the flow of blood to the intestine, allowing allergens to be 
absorbed via the de -energized tissues. If the blood sugar stays low in  spite of the adrenalin, white 
cells will be stimulated to release histamine and other pro -inflammatory substances, but the 
adrenalin will also cause the secretion of glucocorticoids. Night -sweats and neurological 
symptoms can be produced by these hormonal  responses. The glucocorticoids first induce, then - 
at high levels - destroy the detoxifying enzymes.  
Special conditions, such as a bowel infection, or immaturity of the intestine, can allow large 
amounts of allergens to pass through the intestinal barrie rs. In Los Angeles, I learned that 
physicians and nutritionists often advise welfare mothers to start feeding beans to their babies at 
six months. In parts of Africa, babies are given "bean milk" from the beginning instead of milk.  
The Epstein -Barr virus, which is believed(*) to cause Burkitt's lymphoma and infectious 
mononucleosis, has often been proposed as a cause of the chronic fatigue syndrome. R.J.V. 
Pulvertaft ( 8) found "a close similarity between Burkitt cell s and human lymphocytes stimulated 
by bean extract." He concluded that "...the possibility of a relation between Burkitt's lymphoma 
and a diet of beans should not be neglected," though he emphasized that other factors must be 
considered, since most people who eat beans don't develop the disease. The intestinal parasites 
which are common in tropical Africa can cause inflammation of the bowel, leading to the 
absorption of large amounts of antigens.  
Since the bowel becomes inflamed in influenza, it is reasonab le to think that some of the 
symptoms of "the flu" are produced by absorbed bowel toxins.  
The variations in the post -influenza syndromes are very likely influenced by the nature of the 
bacteria or foods which are present, chronically or at the time of an u ncompensated stress or 
inflammatory disease. K.M. Stevens ( 9) has argued that while rheumatic fever and 
glomerulonephritis are caused by the antigens of streptocci, systemic lupus erythematosis (SLE) 
is probably caused by the antigens of grampositive lactobacilli found in the normal flora.  Migraine, SLE, CFS, thyro id problems, and some kinds of porphyria seem to be more common 
in women of reproductive age, and are often exacerbated by premenstrual hormone changes. 
According to Stevens, "SLE is almost entirely a disease of women of child -bearing age. One 
possibility for this selection could be that women during this period harbour a peculiar flora. This 
is indeed the case; large numbers of gram -positive lactobacilli are present in the vagina only 
during the thirty -odd years when regular menstrual activity is present."  In 1974, I noticed that I 
consistently got a migraine headache after drinking a lactobacillus milk product, and stopped 
using (and recommending) yogurt and other lactobacillus foods, though I suspected it was the 
lactic acid which caused the symptoms. I s till consider lactic acid to be a metabolic burden, 
especially when combined with an estrogen excess, but Stevens' main point, about the 
significance of our immunological response to systemic bacterial antigens, deserves more 
attention.  
I have previously discussed the use of antibiotics (and/or carrot fiber and/or charcoal) to relieve 
the premenstrual syndrome, and have mentioned the study in which the lifespan was extended by 
occasionally adding charcoal to the diet. Recently, I heard ab out a Mexican farmer who collected 
his neighbors' runt pigs, and got them to grow normally by adding charcoal to their diet. This 
probably achieves the same thing as adding antibiotics to their food, which is practiced by pig 
farmers in the U.S. to promote  growth and efficient use of food. Charcoal, besides binding and 
removing toxins, is also a powerful catalyst for the oxidative destruction of many toxic 
chemicals. In a sense, it anticipates the action of the protective enzymes of the intestinal wall and 
the liver.  
Our normal defenses against environmental toxins include a surface layer of mucus, the IgA 
antibodies on membranes, the brush border of intestinal cells, on which protein digestion 
normally takes place, enzymes in the intestine and liver which h ydoxylate and glucuronidate 
smaller molecules of toxins, and binding -proteins, such as albumin and metallothionein, all of 
which keep toxins from entering other parts of the body. When toxins get past those barriers, 
survival depends on other adaptive fact ors, including the catatoxic steroids and the antioxidative 
systems. ( 10, 11) Besides metabolizing exogenous toxins, the detoxifying enzymes of the 
monooxygenase system m etabolize endogenous substances, including steroids, prostaglandins, 
and polyunsaturated fatty acids, which affect allergic reactivity. An imbalance of this system can 
waste the protective steroids.(12)  
Recently, it has been argued that the allergic reacti on itself functions as an immunological 
defense against toxins.(13) However, when the intestine and liver are injured, the production of 
cholesterol is often decreased to such a great degree that there isn't enough to maintain adequate 
production of the ca tatoxic and anti -inflammatory steroids. Many people with the allergic fatigue 
syndrome have a dangerously Iow blood cholesterol level of 90 to 130 mg%. (Fruit, because of 
its fructose content, usually helps restore liver cholesterol synthesis.)  
Undercooked  and raw plant materials in general are important sources of toxins and allergens. 
Legumes have recently become more important factors in the U.S. diet, because of a complex 
shift of ideology about the "healthful" diet, which is often associated with a com pulsion to 
"exercise," and sometimes to use stylish, but toxic, food supplements such as tryptophan, iron, 
and manganese. Ascorbic acid tablets may be contaminated with enough iron and/or other catalysts to produce a toxic amount of free hydroxyl radicals. (14) In a vegetarian diet containing 
very little vitamin A as retinol, carotene can sometimes become toxic, since its conversion to 
retinol requires vitamin B12 and other liver functions that seem to depend on adequate thyroid 
function, and excessive carot ene can be anti -thyroid as well as anti -steroidogenic. A deficiency 
of retinol can damage the barrier functions or membranes, various immune functions including 
antibody formation, and the synthesis of protective steroids.  
Some women with premenstrual fati gue have found that the "premenstrual" phase tends to get 
longer and longer, until they have chronic fatigue. I found that to be one of the easiest "PMS" 
problems to correct. When people are older, and have been sick longer, the fatigue problem is 
likely t o involve more systems of the body. The larger the quantity of "toxic fat" stored in the 
body, the more careful the person must be about increasing metabolic and physical activity. 
Using more vitamin E, short -chain saturated fats, and other anti -lipid-peroxidation agents is 
important.  
Sixty years ago, people with chronic fatigue were often said to suffer from "nervous breakdown," 
and advised to go to a sanitarium for a vacation, and to stop bothering the doctor. A change of 
activity, of place, of work, or o f associates can sometimes be very therapeutic. Changing the diet 
can have social and ideological overtones, and can be done more easily while on a vacation trip. 
But sometimes the problem can be solved simply by avoiding some vegetable materials and food 
supplements, and/or by correcting hormonal problems, and/or by modifying the intestinal 
ecology.  
Correspondence & Subscriptions:  
Raymond Peat, Ph.D.  
Ray Peat's Newsletter  
Bio-Research for Global Evolution  
P.O. Box 3427  
Eugene, OR 97403  
503-345-9855  
References   
(1.) N.R. Ling, Lymphocyte Stimulation, North -Holland Publ. Co., Amsterdam, 1968.  
(2.) I.V. Gmoshinskii, et al., Effects of vitamin A deficiency on permeability of the small intestinal 
mucosa for macro -molecules in adult rats, Bull. Exp. Biol. Med. 103(2), pp. 179 -182, 1986.  
(3.) W.C. Alvarez, Nervousness, Indigestion, and Pain, P.B. Hoeber, Med. Bk. Dept. of Harper & 
Brother, New York, 1943.  (4.) I.G. Colditz, et al., Kinetics of endotoxin -induced inflammation in bovine mammary gland, 
Inflammation 12(5), pp. 491 -501, Oct. 1988; and I.S. Schwartz, et al., Lymphocytic mastopathy, 
an autoimmune disease of the breast?, Am. J. Clin. Pathol 93(6), pp. 834 -5, 1990.  
(5.) M.S. Riley, et al., Aerobic work capacity in patients with chron ic fatigue syndrome, Br. Med. 
J. 301, pp. 953 -56, Oct. 1990.  
(6.) I.M. Cox, et al., R.B.C. magnesium and C.F.S., Lancet 337, 757, 1991.  
(7.) A.L. Komaroff, Some  symptoms specific to C.F.S., Modern Medicine 59, October 1991, page 
35. 
(8.) R.F.V. Pulvertaft, PHA in relation to Burkitt's tumour, Lancet Sept. 12, 1964, pp. 552 -554. 
(9.) K.M. Stevens, The Aetiology of SLE, Lancet, Sept. 5, 1964, pp. 506 -508. 
(10.)  N.G. Kolosova, et al., Effect of tocopherol on functional reserves of phagocytes, Bull. Exp. 
Biol. Med. 111 (6), pp. 770 -772, 1991.  
(11.)  S. Ya. D'yachkova, et al., Effect of hyperbaric oxygenation on activ ation of 
immunocompetent  
cells and on lipid peroxidation....Bull. Exp. Biol.  
Med. 112 ( 7), pp. 940 -942, 1991.  
(12.) I.N. Marokko, et al., Correlation between the severity of manifestation of experimental 
food anaphy laxis and the cytochrome P 450W/P 450L Ratio, Bull. Exp. Biol. Med. 112 ( 8), pp. 
1180 -2, 1991.  
(13.) M. Profet, The function of allergy: immunolgoical defense against toxins, Quarterly Rev. of 
Biol 55(1'), pp. 23 -62, March 1991.  
(14.) S.Z. Maskos and W.H. Koppenol, Oxyradicals and multivitamin tablets, Free Radical Biol. 
& med. 11, pp. 609 -610, 1991.  
Note - (*) Antibodies to this virus can be found In 90% of the population, so it isn't very 
meaningful to say that it "causes" those particular conditions.  
Article copyright Townsend Letter for Doctors & Patients.  
~~~~~~~~  
By Raymond Peat  
 