 
References  
Peat, R. (1991). The Generality of Adaptogens. Townsend Letter for Doctors & Patients , (100), 
930. Retr ieved from EBSCO host. 
 
 
The Generality of Adaptogens  
There are far more sensory nerves enteri ng the brain, than motor nerves leaving the brain. 
Generalization and judgment intervene between the complexity of sensation and the coherence of 
behavior. Encountering an infinite world, we marshall our resources for an adequate response. 
For me, this "se nsory domination" of the brain is an important metaphor that offers some insight 
into other systems, because it suggests that interesting events of integration might be happening 
"above" the easily observable mechanical behavior of a particular system that  we are trying to 
understand.  
To bring generality to the understanding of cellular resistance, we should look for events that 
commonly occur during successful or unsuccessful responses to stressors of various types. 
Several years ago, someone found that a "final common pathway" of cellular death was the 
absorption by the cell of a large amount of calcium, when the cells were injured in a variety of 
ways. Working with the stressed heart, F.Z. Meerson spoke of the "calcium triad," suggesting 
that there are wa ys to interrupt the progress of cellular death even after it has started. Calcium 
activates proteinases, phospholipasis, ATP -ases, contraction and oxidative peroxidation, and 
uncouples oxidative phosphorylation, so that numerous drugs can interfere with va rious aspects 
of the cellular death process after it has begun. Knowing that calcium is a normal activator of 
muscle contraction and other normal processes, we can consider the normal physiological 
controls over calcium, as places where a little extra supp ort might keep our cells safely away 
from the "final common pathway" of cell death.  
In different situations, we can see different components of a "terminal" process. For example, 
iron tends to accumulate with age, and areas of calcification in soft tissue typically show iron 
associated with the calcium. (This association is probably both physicochemical and 
pathophysiological.) Vitamin E is protective against the lipid peroxidation induced by iron, [ 1] as 
well as tha t stimulated by calcium. Mice killed by a variety of methods show a high level of 
histamine in their tissues, suggesting that histamine might be involved in a "terminal pathway" 
on either the organismic or the cellular level. Histamine can stimulate the en try of calcium into 
cells. [ 2] On the organismic level there are hormonal changes that accelerate the progress into a 
terminal state, and several of these are closely associated with the metabolism of calcium 
(corti sol, prolactin, and estrogen). Others are associated with the suppression of thyroid function.  
Adaptogens are chemicals which increase an organism's ability to resist stress without suffering 
cumulative damage. This is a useful definition, since it exclude s the glucocorticoids, which 
promote adaptation and short term resistance to stress, but do so at the expense of the organism's 
future reserves. Every aspect of our normal resistance that precedes our resort to cortisol can suggest possible classes of adap togenic substances to strengthen those functions. The avoidance, 
binding, and detoxifying functions are all part of adaptation, but the most important aspect of 
adaptation is the ability to maintain a high level of tissue energy, and the stabilization of 
respiratory energy production is needed for that. Besides the oxidative production of energy, we 
need to prevent the wasteful expenditure of energy, and this requires the ability to raise 
thresholds to stimulation. (We can see both of these processes workin g in the adaptation of a 
healthy child to a serious infection: having a fever, and sleeping.)  
As soon as something interferes with the oxidative production of energy (not having enough 
oxygen, for example, as when running) we adapt biochemically first by i ncreasing the 
consumption of glucose for glycolytic energy production. This increased consumption of glucose 
tends to lower the concentration of glucose in the blood, and this (or various other signals, such 
as pain or fear, that are associated with the ne ed for more glucose) causes the secretion of 
adrenalin, which can mobilize glucose from the liver's glycogen stores. If the glucose stores are 
depleted, the body resorts to the secretion of cortisol, to provide glucose (and other material) by 
cannibalizing  protein from tissues which are momentarily less essential.  
Both adrenalin and ACTH mobilize fat from storage. Stress -mobilized fatty acids contribute to 
the increased lipid -peroxidation seen during stress, and they also tend to damage mitochondria. 
The la rge increase in the death rate from asthma in the last decade or two is now believed[*] to 
be the result of cardiovascular damage caused by the common use of inhalants containing 
catecholamines. Isoproteron01, a commonly used bronchodilator, causes mitocho ndrial damage, 
which can be prevented by blocking the carnitine -dependent oxidation of fatty acids. Since 
carnitine is required for the oxidation of long -chain fatty acids, its analog -betaines (which 
interfere with its transport of fatty acids into the mit ochondria) protect against the damage that 
normally results from stress -induced (or catecholamine -induced) fatty acid oxidation. Since 
saturated fats protect against the cardiac necrosis produced by corn oil, I think it is probably 
lipid-peroxidation resul ting from rapid oxidation of unsaturated fats which causes the heart 
damage in both catecholamine damage [ 3] and corn -oil toxicity. Vitamin E, coconut oil, and the 
carnitine antagonists (betaine derivatives) are ada ptogens that protect respiration by directly 
decreasing lipid -peroxidation.  
Uncompensated stress or injury is a complex process, so it shouldn't be suprising that adaptogens 
have a "broad spectrum" of beneficial biological effects, but it is precisely the breadth of vitamin 
E's effect that have made many physicians reluctant to use it, because they are trained to think in 
terms of "lock and key" specificity in pharmacology. The same reaction can be expected from 
drug-dominated medicine, as results with othe r adaptogens are published. For example, a Soviet 
adaptogen of the betaine class which is used as a feed -additive for animals, has been reported:  
to induce interferon and protect against influenza virus,  
to protect the brain against hypoxia, to promote hea ling of wounds, burns, and sores,  
to activate immune responses,  
to promote cell division in thymus and spleen,  to restore contractility to hypoxic heart tissue,  
to increase the contractile capacity of the heart by increasing ATP concentration,  
to prevent d ecrease of ATP levels under various conditions,  
to reduce isoproteronol or catecholamine -induced myocardial injury,  
to protect the heart against fatty diets,  
to promote methylation of chromatin proteins,  
to promote reparative and replicative DNA synthesis,  
to increase translation of nucleic acids (protein synthesis),  
to stimulate the rate of growth in chickens,  
to have very low toxicity, and  
to be suitable for use in treating a wide variety of cardiovascular diseases, such as cardiac 
insufficiency, myocardi tis, cardiosclerosis, ischemic heart disease, and arrhythmias of varying 
etiology, and to have long -lasting positive inotropic effect, and cardiac -dilating activity. 
[Literature search by P. Hockstaff.]  
Since the substance seems to be a natural plant growt h regulator, and to be cheap to produce, it is 
probably going to meet serious resistance from the drug industry/FDA monopolists, though the 
meat industry is likely to eventually find that it replaces many of the toxic chemicals that are 
now used.  
The adapt ogens of Eleutherococcus and ginseng are already in wide use. It is assumed that their 
steroidal components support the functions of our own protective steroids. These functions 
(normally adequately sustained by our endogenous steroids) are probably catato xic, anti -
catabolic, anti -inflammatory, and osmoregulatory. Since there is so much talk about catabolic or 
anabolic steroids, it's important to say something about the anti -catabolic aspect of the protective 
or adaptogenic steroids.  
On a time scale longer than that of the immediate stress experience, preventing cumulative 
damage is just as important as blocking the immediate injury process. Since cortisol, which is 
life-saving on the short time scale, is a major cause of cumulative damage to the organism, i t is 
important to investigate things which will limit its chronic catabolic effect.  
Although testosterone is very catabolic for the thymus gland, it is anabolic for muscle, and there 
is some evidence that it is directly competitive with cortisol, which is catabolic for muscle. When 
radioactive testosterone was injected into a person, the experimenters were surprised to find that 
its main concentration was in the heart muscle, rather than in the skeletal muscle. This high concentration of testosterone in the  heart muscle suggests that an antagonistic relationship 
between testosterone and cortisol is responsible for the ability of the heart to retain its protein 
while starvation or stress is causing protein to be removed from skin muscle, thymus, and other 
tissues, under cortisol's influence. Such an "anti -catabolic" effect must be especially important 
during the years of growth, so the youth -associated steroids (prenenolone, progesterone, DHEA) 
probably serve in this way, while being available for conversion i nto the more specific 
hormones. Plant steroids such as those in ginseng, having some structural similarity to the 
normal protective hormones, would serve as adaptogens by making up for a reduced amount of 
those normal youth -associated substances.  
Filatov f ound that stressed tissues of both plants and animals produce protective and stimulating 
substances, which can be extracted for medical use. He identified succinic acid as a component 
of his extracts. Szent -Gyorgyi found that succinic acid stimulates respi ration, which might 
explain why it promotes synthesis of pregnenolone and related steroids. It and fumaric acid are 
now considered to be adaptogens. Since succinic acid safely chelates toxic heavy metals out of 
mitochondria, it might also safely carry copp er into the mitochondria. Succinic acid is also 
closely associated with GABA metabolism (gamma -amino butyric acid is converted to succinic 
semialdehyde in a transamination reaction), and so is probably complementary to the GABA 
analogs GHB (gamma -hydroxy b utyrate) and its lactone (which has anti -viral activity). GABA 
analogs are now one of the most actively studied classes of adaptogens. GABA has a wide range 
of stress -blocking actions, including neural inhibition, progesterone promotion, and blood sugar 
regulation.  
The "local anesthetics," which generally have a broad range of effects, are an important class of 
adaptogens. Procaine has been found to normalize almost every system studied. [ 4] Doses far too 
small to ha ve an anesthetic effect have clear biological effects. Lidocaine is used to prevent heart 
arrhythmia, and acts partly by preventing excessive calcium uptake by the cells. The atropine 
family of drugs is structurally similar to the "local anesthetics," and also have a long history of 
use in treating sickness and stress. Most of these chemicals have anti -histamine actions that are 
probably relevant to their value as adaptogens. These chemicals can protect microcirculation 
against spasms produced by exhaustion  or overstimulation. Light can also have this effect. [ 5] 
Promotion of synthesis and stabilization of the detoxifying enzymes is another function of some 
adaptogens. The catatoxic steroids do this, but since they al so have an immediate protective 
effect (that could hardly involve the production of new enzymes), they probably have other 
mechanisms of action, such as improving the capacity for binding toxins of proteins such as 
albumin. Since even cholesterol has catat oxic action, I often advise people to eat more eggs for a 
variety of problems. The egg lipids (including phospholipids and cholesterol) enter the blood in 
microscopic particles, called chylomicrons. Synthetic "liposomes" are a pharmaceutical fad, 
promoted for their ability to transport various drugs, but the liposomes themselves (made from 
egg phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol) have anti -inflammatory and anti -bacterial actions. 
("Anti -inflammatory action of liposomes," V.M. Kreys, et al., Vestnik Akademii  Meditsinskikh 
Nauk no. 6 June 1990, pages 44 -47.) I think we have to include dietary eggs in our list of 
adaptogens.  I have often described the thyroid hormone as the basic anti -stress hormone, because it is 
essential for respiratory energy production. [ 6] The ATP produced under the influence of the 
thyroid hormone binds magnesium, and is relatively stable in its presence. ADP, the lower 
energy phosphate that results when ATP loses one phosphate group, happens to bind calcium. 
Thus, the high energy state o f the cell binds magnesium (when it is available), and the low 
energy state binds calcium. Many of the events that are said to involve "ion pumps" are just 
different "ion -binding states" of the cell. Both thyroid (to form ATP) and magnesium (to 
stabilize A TP) are essential for cellular resistance to stress.  
Magnesium -ATP, and liposomal -ATP administered intravenously have been used successfully to 
treat shock and to restore mitochondrial function, and are undoubtedly powerful "adaptogens," 
but it is much mor e practical to ingest eggs, magnesium -rich foods, and a little thyroid, to get 
"cholesterol -liposomes" and magnesium -ATP. Creatine phosphate, which is normally an intra -
cellular energy reserve in balance with ATP, has been found to prevent the heart damage  caused 
by catecholamines. [ 7] Energy depletion (ATP and creatine phosphate) is probably the central 
event which precipitates the entry of excess calcium into the cell. [ 8] 
Since many of the biochemical changes in aging are the same as those occurring in stress, the 
adaptogens tend to relieve the symptoms of aging. And to some extent, relieving the symptoms 
of aging tends to resist the forces that would otherwise push cells to ward the "final common 
pathways." But the perfect adaptogen would be something that systematically blocked the agents 
of damage before any damage had been done. The avoidance of toxins and other stressors 
(including darkness) should be taken care of before  too much emphasis is put on the use of 
adaptogens. Substances that have one clearly defined adaptogenic function often turn out to have 
several useful functions. Caffeine, for example, promotes thyroid function, blocks both radiation 
and chemical carcinog enesis, and inhibits absorption of iron, which under stress has important 
dysadaptive function.  
Filatov's approach, using complex extracts of stressed tissue, suggests that certain methods of 
food storage and preparation might increase their adaptogen cont ent, e.g., broccoli stored in a 
refrigerator has much more vitamin C than fresh broccoli; cold -dark storage was one of the 
stressors Filatov used. The same principle might apply to the use of crude plant or animal drugs. 
Traditional foods used for convales cents might also include some empirical adaptogens - broths, 
egg-nog, fruit juice, custards, etc.  
Correspondence: Ray Peats Newsletter P.O. Box 3427 Eugene, OR 97403  
References   
1. G.M. Kainova, et al., Activation of endogenous lipid peroxidation in the brain during 
oxidative stress induced by iron and its prevention by vitamin E, Bull Exp Biol & Med 109(1), 
page 43, 1990.  
2. V.N. Bochkov, et al., Histamine induces a free cytoplasmic calcium rise in indo 1 -loaded 
HeLa cells, Bull Exp Biol & Med 109(1), page 50, 1990.  3. E.A. Konorev, et al., Oxidative myocardial damage: protective  action of exogenous 
phosphocreatine, Bull Exp Biol & Med 109, page 281, 1990.  
4. One large study was done at Edgemoor Geriatric Hospital, Santee, California, in 1960.  
5. V.I. Kozlov, et al., Effect of direct exposure to low -intensity laser radiation on morphology 
and function of the zona fasciculata of the albino rat adrenal cortex, Bull Exp Biol & Med 109, 
page 801, 1990.  
6. A.P. Bozhko, et al., Limitation of stress -induced activation of lipid peroxidation by small doses 
of thyroid hormones, Bull Exp Biol & Med 109, page 714, 1990.  
7. E.A. Konorev, et al., Oxidative myocardia l damage: protective action of exogenous 
phosphocreatine, Bull Exp Biol & Med 109, Page 281, 1990.  
8. B.T. Stokes, et al., in Trophic Factors and the Nervous System, ed. by L.A. Horocks, et al., 
Raven Press, Ne w York, 1990.  
Notes  
[*] Of course, the now discontinued use of sulfite preservative (approved and required by the 
FDA) in asthma drugs contributed to that high mortality.  
~~~~~~~~  
By Raymond Peat  
 
Copyright of Townsend Letter for Doctors & Patients is the property of Townsend Letter Group 
and its content may  not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the 
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email 
articles for individual use.  
 
 
Back   