 Vitamin A Toxicity Editor: I am answering and rebutting the comment on Vitamin A in your July 1985 issue, #28, relative to articles published in the past. Current state-of-the-art knowledge of Vitamin A is not offered by "Hypervitaminosis A: A American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, volume 6, #4, published in July, 1958. This was signed by the doctors from Seton Hall College of Medicine and Dentistry, Jersey City, New Jersey. It may be of interest to all readers that I started using Vitamin A, 46 years ago, in dosages averaging 150,000 units a day and have continuously used this dosage on myself and my patients, predicated on an average weight of 150 lbs, getting 150,000 units and under 150 lbs. would get 100,000 units a day. Young children in the 2 or 3 year old age group, would receive 5,000 units twice a week and gradually increase as they came into their teens and older. In as much as this has been ongoing now all of these years, right up to date, in which my daily dosage is still continued to be 150,000 units a day, I have to refute most of what was published, which is certainly outdated. We have known in Preventive Medicine for quite some time that the patients who receive high doses of Vitamin A are being protected from malignancies and particularly malignancies of the skin. Practicing in Florida for the past 12 years, have saved many, many patients from having to have repetitious cancer therapy on their ikin after putting them on the dosage and the nutritional program that I use in getting these beople back to healthy skin or much healthier skin than they had. It may interest you to note uso that those people who are not taking any Vitamin A invariably have diverticulosis preent in their intestinal tract and usually the arge bowel, so that again, we are treating everal modalities here besides what I believe o be a lot of cancer protection. The Bonn clinic in Germany introduced the ise of high dosages of Vitamin A, back in, I elieve, the late '60's and has continued to use he dosages up to a million units a day along vith other nutrition without any problems. I personally have taken as high as one million nits a day for a period of two months, 8 weeks, nd found that all of my laboratory levels were vell within normal limits and no problems volved from taking this. [Current Vitamin A evel 72.9 megldl (normal 20-80 megldl)]. Again, I stress, other nutrition was taken vith it. When practicing in Wisconsin for 35 years, saw lots of erythema nodosum which I butinely treated with one-half million units : Vitamin A, injected several times a week, ius dressings of cod liver oil ointment and iran wraps to heal the skin on some of my itients who were having great problems in e winter time with cracking and dry skin and aking. All of these things were easily corcted with the proper dose of Vitamin A which after experimenting on myself for at least 5 years, I started using it on patients and have since. We anticipate writing an article or a book on Vitamin A in the very near future and hopefully publish before the end of this year, which will document the laboratory work we have been doing all of these years, particularly on myself. When patients and doctors look at my hands and my complexion, they are literally amazed at the young tissue that I have relative to my age. The aging spots of visible tissue on myself are absent in spite of the fact that I am exposed to sun in playing 36 to 72 holes of golf per week and walking in the sunshine of Florida. W. Mittlestadt, D.O. 76 East McNab Road Pompano Beach, Florida 33060 (305) 786-0370 
Editor:
 Editor: You printed a letter to the editor regarding Vitamin A; I've been tracking down Vitamin A scare stories of ryears, and when I wrote to the researcher mentioned, he denied working on Vitamin A. In 1974 there was a well circulated rumor, in Washington and Oregon, that Vitamin A had caused blindness. I traced the story to a professor at the University of Oregon Medical School, but she refused to talk to me about it. I think the symptoms associated with moderate amounts of Vitamin A in susceptible people are the result of temporary supression of thyroid function, which can result from an excess of any unsaturated oil. Vitamin E, in preventing toxicity from large doses of Vitamin A. In traditional diets, people who ate fish livers also ate fish thyroids. The three big dangers in the U.S. diet are iron supplementation, excess of unsaturated oils, and sodium restriction. If you would like a review of research on these dangers, I would be glad to write it up. Raymond Peat PO. Box 3427 Eugene, OR 97403 
Glandulars Vindicated
 Editor: Glandular extracts, those that make them, and the physicians that prescribe them were maligned by John Barry N.D., Ph.D in issue 29 of the Townsend Letter. His article was especially interesting to me as a Naturopath, since the initials "N.D." appeared after his name. After reading his completely mechanistic approach to glandular therapy one can't help but wonder where he got his naturopathic training. Wherever his degree came from it is certain that it was not ac companied by any vitalistic philosophy or instruction in clinical observation. While in naturopathic medical college I was trained in the use of glandulars. The concerns that Barry raised in his article were also raised in the classroom and the clinic where I was trained. Any good practitioner would be concerned over the dearth of scientific proof of the efficacy of glandular therapy. Any good practitioner would also be watching closely to see if their therapies worked or not. If the mechanism or effectiveness of a therapy remained unproven and the therapy is noneffective or harmful then one would have to be a fool to continue using it. However if a therapy gives consistent results, wouldn't one be a fool to stop using it simply because it wasn't proven yet? (How many harmful and ineffective therapies are the allopaths using?) John Barry belittles the people who report "It works." Yet, the greatest clinicians are the ones who say: "It works, now lets see how it works." With his approach he would do well to join forces with Victor Herbert. In my private practice I continue to get good results with a handful of high quality glandular extracts, and get poor results with low quality extracts of the same glands. John Barry would be hard pressed to convince a woman who had been infertile for 12 years and then conceived after 3 months of taking Biotics Pituitary (after trying another company's Pituitary for 6 months with no results) that glandulars were ineffective. I have hundreds of patients who get consistent results with Thyroid, Pituitary and Thymus glandulars. These results far outweigh the closeminded, un-naturopathic, mechanistic datribe of John Barry when it comes to my decision as to whether or not to use quality glandular supplements. Walter J. Crinnion, N.D. 13401 NE Bel-Red Road, Suite A4 Bellevue, Washington 98005 (206) 747-9200 
Letter Excellent
 Editor: As you may or may not know we specialize in public health law, and therefore are constantly encountering retrogressive efforts on the part of a backward "establishment" to stifle progress in science, medicine, and nutrition. We have had occasion to represent a number of progressive physicians in connection with these activities. Whatever the case, we greatly appreciate receiving your Letter, and this is simply a communication to indicate that we consider it to be excellent in every respect. Kirkpatrick W. Dilling Dilling, Gronek and Armstrong Attorneys at Law 150 North Wacker Drive Chicago, Illinois 60606 (312) 236-8417